On May 1, 2023, a Cessna 206 light aircraft with seven people on board crashed in the jungle in the Caquetá Department of Colombia. Two of the occupants – the pilot and co-pilot were killed on impact, while four passengers survived the crash. The mother survived for several days and died, leaving the children to fend for themselves. The children, between 11 months and 13 years old, survived for 40 days in the rainforest before being rescued by the Colombian military and volunteers from local indigenous groups.
History of the flight
The 1982 Cessna U206G aircraft, operated by Avianline Charters, departed on the morning of May 1, 2023, from Araracuara Airport, Colombia, on a domestic charter flight to San José del Guaviare, 220 miles (350 km) to the north. At 7:34 am local time, the pilot made a distress call reporting engine failure, and radio contact was lost shortly after. The Colombian Air Force immediately sent out craft to search the area – a Basler BT-67 and Bell Huey helicopter.
Passengers and crew
On board the aircraft were the pilot, Hernando Murcia Morales, aged 57, with about 8300 flight hours, and six passengers: a mother, Magdalena Mucutuy Valencia, with her four children aged approximately 13, 9, 4, and 1 years old, and a local indigenous leader, Herman Mendoza Hernández. The pilot and Mendoza died on impact and the mother died four days later. The four siblings survived. The family was part of the Witoto, an indigenous group familiar with the jungle environment and who are taught to hunt, fish and gather from an early age.
Search and rescue
After the crash, as the children subsequently relayed to the authorities, their mother urged them to "leave and get help." The four children walked away from the wreckage and started roaming the forest, surviving by eating cassava flour retrieved from the plane's wreckage, fruits from Bacaba palm trees and seeds from avichure trees in their surroundings based on their knowledge of native plants as members of the Witoto indigenous group.
Search
Search and rescue teams from the Colombian military and local indigenous communities started searching the area for wreck and remains. They located the wreckage of the Cessna on May 15, two weeks after the crash. Colombian President Gustavo Petro initially tweeted that the children had been found at that time, but that tweet was retracted less than 24 hours later. They also found items belonging to the children, including a child's drinking bottle, and traces of a makeshift shelter, suggesting that the children could still be alive. A small footprint was found a week later. Loudspeakers with a range of a mile were used to broadcast messages in the Witoto language to the children, advising them to stay in one location so that they could be found by the searchers. The head of the Colombian Institute of Family Welfare said the fact that "the jungle was in harvest" meant the children could find and eat fruit that was in bloom.
During the search operation, Wilson, a search and rescue Belgian shepherd that helped the rescuers find a path eventually leading to the children's whereabouts, went missing. A subsequent, two-weeks-long operation with over 70 men was launched to find him, nonetheless unsuccessful.
Rescue
Forty days after the crash, on June 10, 2023, the four children were found and evacuated to the Colombian capital Bogotá for medical treatment. According to the rescuers, the children were malnourished and had many insect bites, but no major health issues. By the time the children were discovered, about 150 troops and rescuers and 200 volunteers from local indigenous groups were searching for them. President Petro said it was "an example of total survival which will remain in history".
Investigation
The Colombian Civil Aviation Authority is responsible for the investigation of this accident. The final report has been published in 2025, citing the major cause as engine failure that probably caused by either fuel system failure or fuel contamination. The investigation team made several safety recommendations on fuel system inspection, Search and Rescue service, Amazonic operations, etc.
Aftermath
Following the rescue of the children, their maternal grandfather, Narciso Mucutuy, requested that the children be relocated closer to their family in Villavicencio. A custody battle ensued between the father of the two youngest children, Manuel Ranoque, and their grandfather, who laid claims of domestic violence against their father. The two elder children have a different father and Ranoque has not been granted access to them following the accident. As of 13 June 2023, a child protection agency was in the process of interviewing relatives to determine the most suitable custody arrangement and said it was investigating the allegations of domestic abuse.
In media
The search for the children was the subject of a 2024 Netflix documentary film, The Lost Children, and a 2025 National Geographic documentary film, Lost in the Jungle.

Australian Minerals Industry Research Association Limited (AMIRA), now AMIRA Global is a mining research and development organisation that was founded in 1959 in Melbourne, Australia. In the early 2000s, the association changed its name to Amira Global, to incorporate its international connections.
History
AMIRA first formed in 1959 by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), to support the growing mining industry's research component. In a 1961 letter from the University of Queensland (UQ), to the inaugural secretary of AMIRA, Beryl Jacka, detailed the foundational aspirations of the new organisation. This was to "facilitate the technological advancement of its members in the coal, petroleum and associated industries". However, for the first decade of its existence, it struggled to make ends meet. In addition, there was no permanent CEO of the not for profit organisation until July 1968. In that year, Jim May was appointed AMIRA's first full time CEO in which he served in this capacity until his retirement in 1994. In that time, May initiated the ‘AMIRA model’ in which research and development (R&D) collaborative methods were introduced throughout the organisation. Thus, by the 1980s, AMIRA became the preferred mechanism for minerals research in Australia and many other countries as the organisation began to spread beyond Australia. Some of those countries that AMIRA has and maintains strong connections is Chile, South Africa and the United States to name a few. Upon May's retirement, the organisation had grown to encompass over 50 staff with 70 projects valued at over $30 million. From the 1990s, AMIRA remained a leading research body for many large mining companies. However, it changed its name to simply ‘AMIRA’ to reflect the international approach the company was becoming. Moreover, as the organisation began to branch further out from its beginnings in Melbourne, the company moved its base to Perth, Western Australia, to be closer to the mineral industry in the state.
Between 1973 and 2004, AMIRA won various prizes in the mining industry through its research. This included the Prince Philip prize for industrial design in 1973, and the Eureka Australian Museum Prize for industry in 1992, respectively.
Company heads
Below, lists the CEOs of AMIRA since its first permanent full time CEO was appointed in 1968 to the present.

ANSI A300 is the tree care industry standard of care in the USA. It was developed by Tree Care Industry Association and maintained by consensus of various industry stakeholders through periodically reviewing and updating the guidelines. The standard is divided into ten parts:
Part 1 – Pruning
Part 2 – Soil Management
Part 3 – Supplemental Support Systems
Part 4 – Lightning Protection Systems
Part 5 – Management of Trees on Construction Sites
Part 6 – Planting and Transplanting
Part 7 – Integrated Vegetation Management
Part 8 – Root Management Standard
Part 9 – Tree Risk Assessment
Part 10 – Integrated Pest Management
A proposed A300 Part 11, Urban Forest Products, was not adopted because it was deemed to be outside the scope of tree care management standards.

ASARCO (American Smelting and Refining Company) is a mining, smelting, and refining company based in Tucson, Arizona, which mines and processes primarily copper.
Its three largest open-pit mines are the Mission, Silver Bell and Ray mines in Arizona. Its mines produce 350,000,000 to 400,000,000 pounds (160,000,000 to 180,000,000 kg) of copper a year. ASARCO conducts solvent extraction and electrowinning at the Ray and Silver Bell mines in Pima County, Arizona, and Pinal County, Arizona, and operates a smelter in Hayden, Arizona. ASARCO's smelting plant in El Paso, Texas, was suspended in 1999 and then demolished on April 13, 2013. Before closing, the plant produced 1,000,000,000 pounds (450,000,000 kg) of anodes each year. Refining at the mines as well as at a copper refinery in Amarillo, Texas, produce 375,000,000 pounds (170,000,000 kg) of refined copper each year.
ASARCO's hourly workers are primarily represented by the United Steelworkers.
ASARCO has 20 superfund sites across the United States, and it is subject to considerable litigation over pollution. After emerging from bankruptcy in 2008, it made a settlement with the government of $1.79 billion for contamination at various sites; the funds were allotted to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for cleanup at 26 sites around the country.
History
ASARCO was founded in 1888 as the American Smelting and Refining Company by Henry H. Rogers, William Rockefeller, Adolph Lewisohn, Robert S. Towne, Anton Eilers, and Leonard Lewisohn.
In April 1901, the Guggenheim family gained control of the company, and in 1905, bought the Tacoma smelter from the Bunker Hill Mining Company. ASARCO eventually controlled 90% of the U.S. lead production, essentially becoming a smelter trust.
Based in Tucson, Arizona, the company grew to conduct mining, smelting, and refining of primarily copper. Open-pit mining is primarily utilized as the most efficient method of recovering this metal; the company's three largest such works are the Mission, Silver Bell, and the Ray mines in Arizona. The company had also operated in silver mining in Idaho. Its mines produce 350,000,000 to 400,000,000 pounds (160,000,000 to 180,000,000 kg) of copper a year. ASARCO conducts solvent extraction and electrowinning at the Ray and Silver Bell mines in Pima County, Arizona, and Pinal County, Arizona, and operates a smelter in Hayden, Arizona. It also had a smelting plant in El Paso, Texas, operations of which have since been suspended.
Chemetco, once one of the U.S.'s major secondary copper smelters, maintained a critical commercial relationship with ASARCO through the supply of unrefined copper anodes produced at its Hartford, Illinois facility. According to a 2003 United States International Trade Commission report, Chemetco regularly shipped semi-refined anodes by rail to ASARCO’s Amarillo, Texas, refinery for final electrolytic purification into 99.99% copper cathode. The closure of Chemetco in 2001 caused ASARCO to significantly curtail production at its Amarillo facility, which had an annual refining capacity of 290,000 metric tons, due to the sudden loss of this essential feedstock. The 290,000 metric tons figure refers to the Amarillo refinery’s total annual refining capacity, not the volume of feedstock previously supplied to ASARCO.
From 1901 to 1959, American Smelting and Refining was included in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. In 1975 it officially changed its name to ASARCO Incorporated. In 1999 it was acquired by Grupo México. On August 9, 2005, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in Corpus Christi, Texas under then-president Daniel Tellechea.
As of 2019, ASARCO operates two primary locations in the United States, a mining and smelting complex in Arizona and a copper refinery in Amarillo, Texas.
Pollution and environmental issues
ASARCO has been found responsible for environmental pollution at 20 Superfund sites across the U.S. by the Environmental Protection Agency. Among those sites are:
American Smelting and Refining Co., located in Omaha, Nebraska. Plant disassembled, remediation completed and site reused.
Interstate Lead Company, or ILCO, labeled EPA Site ALD041906173, and located in Leeds, Jefferson County, Alabama
Argo Smelter, Omaha & Grant Smelter, labeled EPA Site COD002259588, and located at Vasquez Boulevard and I-70 in Denver, Colorado
"Smeltertown", El Paso County, Texas, where the copper plant's furnaces were illegally used to dispose of hazardous waste. The plant has since been dismantled.
California Gulch mine and river systems in Leadville, Colorado;
Summitville Consolidated Mining Corp., Inc. (SCMCI), now bankrupt, EPA Site COD983778432, in Del Norte, Rio Grande County, Colorado;
ASARCO Globe Plant, EPA Site COD007063530, Globeville, near South Platte River, Denver and Adams County, Colorado;
Bunker Hill Mining and Metallurgical, Coeur d'Alene River Basin, Idaho;
Kin-Buc Landfill in New Jersey;
Tar Creek (Ottawa County) lead and zinc operations and surrounding residences in Oklahoma;
Commencement Bay, Near Shore/Tide Flats smelter, groundwater, and residences in Tacoma and Ruston, Washington.
Everett Smelter, Everett, Washington.
Murray, Utah lead smelter operation, since reclaimed as part of EPA Superfund program and now the location of the Intermountain Medical Center.
Litigation history
After the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment sued ASARCO for damages to natural resources in 1983, the EPA placed the ASARCO Globe Plant on its National Priorities List of Superfund sites, with ASARCO to pay for the site's cleanup.
In 1972 ASARCO's downtown Omaha plant in Nebraska was found to be releasing high amounts of lead into the air and ground surrounding the plant. In 1995 ASARCO submitted a demolition and site cleanup plan to the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality for their impact on the local residential area. Fined $3.6 million in 1996 for discharging lead and other pollutants into the Missouri River, ASARCO closed its Omaha plant in July 1997. After extensive site cleanup, the land was turned over to the City of Omaha as a 23-acre (93,000 m2) park. All of East Omaha, comprising more than 8,000 acres (32 km2), was declared a Superfund site. As of 2003, 290 acres (1.2 km2) had been cleaned.
In 1991 the Coeur d'Alene Tribe filed suit under CERCLA against Hecla Mining Company, ASARCO and other defendants for damages and cleanup costs downstream of what has been designated as the Bunker Hill Mine and Smelting Complex Superfund site. Contamination had affected Lake Coeur d'Alene and the Saint Joe River, as well as related waters and lands, and cleanup had been under way since the early 1980s. In 1996 the United States joined the suit. In 2008 after emerging from bankruptcy, ASARCO LLC settled for $452 million for contributions to this site. This was part of a nearly $2 billion settlement (see below) with the US for a total of 26 sites.
In 2007, the Environmental Protection Agency released the results of soil and air tests in Hayden, Arizona, taken adjacent to the ASARCO Hayden Smelter. The results showed abnormally high amounts of pollutants that violate prescribed health standards. Arsenic, lead and copper were among the most egregious pollutants found in Hayden. As a consequence of the contamination, the EPA proposed to add Hayden, Arizona, to the list of Federal Superfund sites. This action would provide funding to clean up the contamination. ASARCO fought the action, supported by Democratic Gov. Janet Napolitano, who said: "I am asking that the EPA delay final decision on listing until March 31, 2008. This would provide ample time for the EPA, in close coordination with ADEQ, to enter an agreement with ASARCO to conduct remedial actions..." After emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2008, ASARCO made a settlement with the government of $1.79 billion for contamination at various sites; the funds were allotted to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for cleanup at 26 sites around the country. A final settlement for $1.79 billion was made in 2009 for up 80 sites, including one of the most notorious, the smelting plant at El Paso, Texas, for which cleanup was set to start in 2010.
Documentary
ASARCO's Tar Creek Superfund site was the subject of the film documentary Tar Creek (2009), made by Matt Myers. At one time, Tar Creek was considered to be the worst environmental problem on the EPA's list of more than 1200 sites.

An abrasive is a material, often a mineral, that is used to shape or finish a workpiece through rubbing which leads to part of the workpiece being worn away by friction. While finishing a material often means polishing it to gain a smooth, reflective surface, the process can also involve roughening as in satin, matte or beaded finishes. In short, the ceramics which are used to cut, grind and polish other softer materials are known as abrasives.
Abrasives are extremely commonplace and are used very extensively in a wide variety of industrial, domestic, and technological applications. This gives rise to a large variation in the physical and chemical composition of abrasives as well as the shape of the abrasive. Some common uses for abrasives include grinding, polishing, buffing, honing, cutting, drilling, sharpening, lapping, and sanding (see abrasive machining). (For simplicity, "mineral" in this article will be used loosely to refer to both minerals and mineral-like substances whether man-made or not.)
Files are not abrasives; they remove material not by scratching or rubbing, but by the cutting action of sharp teeth which have been cut into the surface of the file, very much like those of a saw. However, diamond files are a form of coated abrasive (as they are metal rods coated with diamond powder).
Mechanics of abrasion
Abrasives generally rely upon a difference in hardness between the abrasive and the material being worked upon, the abrasive being the harder of the two substances. However, it is not strictly necessary, as any two solid materials that repeatedly rub against each other will tend to wear each other away; examples include, softer shoe soles wearing away wooden or stone steps over decades or centuries or glaciers abrading stone valleys.
Typically, materials used as abrasives are either hard minerals (rated at 7 or above on Mohs scale of mineral hardness) or are synthetic stones, some of which may be chemically and physically identical to naturally occurring minerals but which cannot be called minerals as they did not arise naturally. (While useful for comparative purposes, the Mohs scale is of limited value to materials engineers as it is an arbitrary, ordinal, irregular scale.) Diamond, a common abrasive, for instance occurs both naturally and is industrially produced, as is corundum which occurs naturally but which is nowadays more commonly manufactured from bauxite. However, even softer minerals like calcium carbonate are used as abrasives, such as "polishing agents" in toothpaste.
These minerals are either crushed or are already of a sufficiently small size (anywhere from macroscopic grains as large as about 2 mm to microscopic grains about 0.001 mm in diameter) to permit their use as an abrasive. These grains, commonly called grit, have rough edges, often terminating in points which will decrease the surface area in contact and increase the localised contact pressure. The abrasive and the material to be worked are brought into contact while in relative motion to each other. Force applied through the grains causes fragments of the worked material to break away, while simultaneously smoothing the abrasive grain and/or causing the grain to work loose from the rest of the abrasive.
Some factors which will affect how quickly a substance is abraded include:
Difference in hardness between the two substances: a much harder abrasive will cut faster and deeper
Grain size (grit size): larger grains will cut faster as they also cut deeper
Adhesion between grains, between grains and backing, between grains and matrix: determines how quickly grains are lost from the abrasive and how soon fresh grains, if present, are exposed
Contact force: more force will cause faster abrasion
Loading: worn abrasive and cast off work material tends to fill spaces between abrasive grains so reducing cutting efficiency while increasing friction
Use of lubricant/coolant/metalworking fluid: Can carry away swarf (preventing loading), transport heat (which may affect the physical properties of the workpiece or the abrasive), decrease friction (with the substrate or matrix), suspend worn work material and abrasives allowing for a finer finish, conduct stress to the workpiece.
Abrasive minerals
Abrasives may be classified as either natural or synthetic. When discussing sharpening stones, natural stones have long been considered superior but advances in material technology are seeing this distinction become less distinct. Many synthetic abrasives are effectively identical to a natural mineral, differing only in that the synthetic mineral has been manufactured rather than mined. Impurities in the natural mineral may make it less effective.
Some naturally occurring abrasives are:
Calcite (calcium carbonate)
Emery (impure corundum)
Diamond dust (synthetic diamonds are used extensively)
Novaculite
Pumice
Iron(III) oxide
Sand
Corundum
Garnet
Sandstone
Rotten stone (Tripoli)
Powdered feldspar
Staurolite
Some abrasive minerals (such as zirconia alumina) occur naturally but are sufficiently rare or sufficiently more difficult or costly to obtain such that a synthetic stone is used industrially. These and other artificial abrasives include:
Borazon (cubic boron nitride or CBN)
Ceramic
Ceramic aluminium oxide
Ceramic iron oxide
Corundum (alumina or aluminium oxide)
Dry ice
Glass powder
Steel abrasive
Silicon carbide (carborundum)
Zirconia alumina
Boron carbide
Slags
Manufactured abrasives
Abrasives are shaped for various purposes. Natural abrasives are often sold as dressed stones, usually in the form of a rectangular block. Both natural and synthetic abrasives are commonly available in a wide variety of shapes, often coming as bonded or coated abrasives, including blocks, belts, discs, wheels, sheets, rods and loose grains.
Bonded abrasives
A bonded abrasive is composed of an abrasive material contained within a matrix, although very fine aluminium oxide abrasive may comprise sintered material. This matrix is called a binder and is often a clay, a resin, a glass or a rubber. This mixture of binder and abrasive is typically shaped into blocks, sticks, or wheels. The most common abrasive used is aluminium oxide. Also common are silicon carbide, tungsten carbide and garnet. Artificial sharpening stones are often a bonded abrasive and are readily available as a two sided block, each side being a different grade of grit.
Grinding wheels are cylinders that are rotated at high speed. While once worked with a foot pedal or hand crank, the introduction of electric motors has made it necessary to construct the wheel to withstand greater radial stress to prevent the wheel flying apart as it spins. Similar issues arise with cutting wheels, which are often structurally reinforced with impregnated fibres. High relative speed between abrasive and workpiece often makes necessary the use of a lubricant of some kind. Traditionally, they were called coolants as they were used to prevent frictional heat build up which could damage the workpiece (such as ruining the temper of a blade). Some research suggests that the heat transport property of a lubricant is less important when dealing with metals as the metal will quickly conduct heat from the work surface. More important are their effects upon lessening tensile stresses while increasing some compressive stresses and reducing "thermal and mechanical stresses during chip formation".
Various shapes are also used as heads on rotary tools used in precision work, such as scale modelling.
Bonded abrasives need to be trued and dressed after they are used. Dressing is the cleaning of the waste material (swarf and loose abrasive) from the surface and exposing fresh grit. Depending upon the abrasive and how it was used, dressing may involve the abrasive being simply placed under running water and brushed with a stiff brush for a soft stone or the abrasive being ground against another abrasive, such as aluminium oxide used to dress a grinding wheel.
Truing is restoring the abrasive to its original surface shape. Wheels and stones tend to wear unevenly, leaving the cutting surface no longer flat (said to be "dished out" if it is meant to be a flat stone) or no longer the same diameter across the cutting face. This will lead to uneven abrasion and other difficulties.
Coated abrasives
A coated abrasive comprises an abrasive fixed to a backing material such as paper, cloth, rubber, resin, polyester or even metal, many of which are flexible. Sandpaper is a very common coated abrasive. Coated abrasives are most commonly the same minerals as are used for bonded abrasives. A bonding agent (often some sort of adhesive or resin) is applied to the backing to provide a flat surface to which the grit is then subsequently adhered. A woven backing may also use a filler agent (again, often a resin) to provide additional resilience.
Coated abrasives may be shaped for use in rotary and orbital sanders, for wrapping around sanding blocks, as handpads, as closed loops for use on belt grinders, as striking surfaces on matchboxes, on diamond plates and diamond steels. Diamond tools, though for cutting, are often abrasive in nature.
Other abrasives and their uses
Sand, glass beads, metal pellets copper slag and dry ice may all be used for a process called sandblasting (or similar, such as the use of glass beads which is "bead blasting"). Dry ice will sublimate leaving behind no residual abrasive.
Cutting compound used on automotive paint is an example of an abrasive suspended in a liquid, paste or wax, as are some polishing liquids for silverware and optical media. The liquid, paste or wax acts as a binding agent that keeps the abrasive attached to the cloth which is used as a backing to move the abrasive across the work piece. On cars in particular, wax may serve as both a protective agent by preventing exposure of the paint of metal to air and also act as an optical filler to make scratches less noticeable. Toothpaste contains calcium carbonate or silica as a "polishing agent" to remove plaque and other matter from teeth as the hardness of calcium carbonate is less than that of tooth enamel but more than that of the contaminating agent.
Very fine rouge powder was commonly used for grinding glass, being somewhat replaced by modern ceramics, and is still used in jewellery making for a highly reflective finish.
Cleaning products may also contain abrasives suspended in a paste or cream. They are chosen to be reasonably safe on some linoleum, tile, metal or stone surfaces. However, many laminate surfaces and ceramic topped stoves are easily damaged by these abrasive compounds. Even ceramic/pottery tableware or cookware can damage these surfaces, particularly the bottom of the tableware, which is often unglazed in part or in whole and acts as simply another bonded abrasive.
Metal pots and stoves are often scoured with abrasive cleaners, typically in the form of the aforementioned cream or paste or of steel wool and non woven scouring pads which holds fine grits abrasives.
Human skin is also subjected to abrasion in the form of exfoliation. Abrasives for this can be much softer and more exotic than for other purposes and may include things like almond and oatmeal. Dermabrasion and microdermabrasion are now rather commonplace cosmetic procedures which use mineral abrasives.
Scratched compact discs and DVDs may sometimes be repaired through buffing with a very fine compound, the principle being that a multitude of small scratches will be more optically transparent than a single large scratch. However, this does take some skill and will eventually cause the protective coating of the disc to be entirely eroded (especially if the original scratch is deep), at which time, the data surface will be destroyed if abrasion continues.
Silicon carbide powders are commonly used as abrasive materials in various machining processes, including grinding, water-jet cutting, and sandblasting. These powders are effective for fine grinding or rough polishing of semiconductors, ceramics, and ferrous materials.
Choice of abrasive
The shape, size and nature of the workpiece and the desired finish will influence the choice of the abrasive used. A bonded abrasive grind wheel may be used to commercially sharpen a knife (producing a hollow grind), but an individual may then sharpen the same knife with a natural sharpening stone or an even flexible coated abrasive (like a sandpaper) stuck to a soft, non-slip surface to make achieving a convex grind easier. Similarly, a brass mirror may be cut with a bonded abrasive, have its surface flattened with a coated abrasive to achieve a basic shape, and then have finer grades of abrasive successively applied culminating in a wax paste impregnated with rouge to leave a sort of "grainless finish" called, in this case, a "mirror finish".
Also, different shapes of adhesive may make it harder to abrade certain areas of the workpiece. Health hazards can arise from any dust produced (which may be ameliorated through the use of a lubricant) which could lead to silicosis (when the abrasive or workpiece is a silicate) and the choice of any lubricant. Besides water, oils are the most common lubricants. These may present inhalation hazards, contact hazards and, as friction necessarily produces heat, flammable material hazards.
An abrasive which is too hard or too coarse can remove too much material or leave undesired scratch marks. Besides being unsightly, scratching can have other, more serious effects. Excessive abrasion or the presence of scratches may:
diminish or destroy usefulness (as in the case of scratching optical lenses and compact discs or dulling knives);
trap dirt, water, or other material;
increase surface area (permitting greater chemical reactivity such as increased rusting which is also affected by matter caught in scratches);
erode or penetrate a coating (such as a paint or a chemical or wear resistant coating);
overly quickly cause an object to wear away (such as a blade or a gemstone);
increase friction (as in jeweled bearings and pistons).
A finer or softer abrasive will tend to leave much finer scratch marks which may even be invisible to the naked eye (a "grainless finish"); a softer abrasive may not even significantly abrade a certain object. A softer or finer abrasive will take longer to cut, as it tends to cut less deeply than a coarser, harder material. Also, the softer abrasive may become less effective more quickly as the abrasive is itself abraded. This allows fine abrasives to be used in the polishing of metal and lenses where the series of increasingly fine scratches tends to take on a much more shiny or reflective appearance or greater transparency. Very fine abrasives may be used to coat the strop for a cut-throat razors, however, the purpose of stropping is not to abrade material but to straighten the burr on an edge. The final stage of sharpening Japanese swords is called polishing and may be a form of superfinishing.
Different chemical or structural modifications may be made to alter the cutting properties of the abrasive.
Other very important considerations are price and availability. Diamond, for a long time considered the hardest substance in existence, is actually softer than fullerite and even harder aggregated diamond nanorods, both of which have been synthesised in laboratories, but no commercial process has yet been developed. Diamond itself is expensive due to scarcity in nature and the cost of synthesising it. Bauxite is a very common ore which, along with corundum's reasonably high hardness, contributes to corundum's status as a common, inexpensive abrasive.
Thought must be given to the desired task about using an appropriately hard abrasive. At one end, using an excessively hard abrasive wastes money by wearing it down when a cheaper, less hard abrasive would suffice. At the other end, if the abrasive substance is too soft, abrasion does not take place in a timely fashion, effectively wasting the abrasive as well as any accruing costs associated with loss of time.
Other instances of abrasion
Aside from the aforementioned uses of shaping and finishing, abrasives may also be used to prepare surfaces for application of some sort of paint of adhesive. An excessively smooth surface may prevent paint and adhesives from adhering as strongly as an irregular surface could allow. Inflatable tyre repair kits (which, on bicycles particularly, are actually patches for the inner tube rather than the tyre) require use of an abrasive so that the self-vulcanising cement will stick strongly.
Inadvertently, people who use knives on glass or metal cutting boards are abrading their knife blades. The pressure at the knife edge can easily create microscopic (or even macroscopic) cuts in the board. This cut is a ready source of abrasive material as well as a channel full of this abrasive through which the edge slides. For this reason, and without regard for the health benefits, wooden boards are much more desirable. A similar occurrence arises with glass-cutters. Glass-cutters have circular blades that are designed to roll not slide. They should never retrace an already effected cut.
Undesired abrasion may result from the presence of carbon in internal combustion engines. While smaller particles are readily transported by the lubrication system, larger carbon particles may abrade components with close tolerances. The carbon arises from the excessive heating of engine oil or from incomplete combustion. This soot may contain fullerenes which are noted for their extreme hardness—and small size and limited quantity which would tend to limit their effect.

Acheulean (; also Acheulian and Mode II), from the French acheuléen after the type site of Saint-Acheul, is an archaeological industry of stone tool manufacture characterized by the distinctive oval and pear-shaped "hand axes" associated with Homo erectus and derived species such as Homo heidelbergensis.
Acheulean tools were produced during the Lower Palaeolithic era across Africa and much of West Asia, South Asia, East Asia and Europe, and are typically found with Homo erectus remains. It is thought that Acheulean technologies first developed about 2 million years ago, derived from the more primitive Oldowan technology associated with Homo habilis.
The Acheulean includes at least the early part of the Middle Paleolithic. Its end is not well defined; if Sangoan (also known as Epi-Acheulean) is included, it may be taken to last until as late as 130,000 years ago. In Europe and Western Asia, early Neanderthals utilized Acheulean technology, later transitioning to the more advanced Mousterian beginning around 320,000 years ago.
History of research
The type site for the Acheulean is Saint-Acheul, a suburb of Amiens, the capital of the Somme department in Picardy, where artifacts were found in 1859.
John Frere is generally credited as being the first to suggest a very ancient date for Acheulean hand-axes. In 1797, he sent two examples to the Royal Academy in London from Hoxne in Suffolk. He had found them in prehistoric lake deposits along with the bones of extinct animals and concluded that they were made by people "who had not the use of metals" and that they belonged to a "very ancient period indeed, even beyond the present world". His ideas were, however, ignored by his contemporaries, who subscribed to a pre-Darwinian view of human evolution.
Later, Jacques Boucher de Crèvecœur de Perthes, working between 1836 and 1846, collected further examples of hand-axes and fossilised animal bone from the gravel river terraces of the Somme near Abbeville in northern France. Again, his theories attributing great antiquity to the finds were spurned by his colleagues, until one of de Perthes' main opponents, Marcel Jérôme Rigollot, began finding more tools near Saint Acheul. Following visits to both Abbeville and Saint Acheul by the geologist Joseph Prestwich, the age of the tools was finally accepted.
In 1872, Louis Laurent Gabriel de Mortillet described the characteristic hand-axe tools as belonging to L'Epoque de St Acheul. The industry was renamed as the Acheulean in 1925.
Dating the Acheulean
Providing calendrical dates and ordered chronological sequences in the study of early stone tool manufacture is often accomplished through one or more geological techniques, such as radiometric dating, often potassium-argon dating, and magnetostratigraphy. From the Konso Formation of Ethiopia, Acheulean hand-axes are dated to about 1.5 million years ago using radiometric dating of deposits containing volcanic ashes. Acheulean tools in South Asia have also been found to be dated as far as 1.5 million years ago. However, in 2003 examples of the Acheulean from the West Turkana region of Kenya were described which have been dated through the method of magnetostratigraphy to about 1.76 million years ago, and in 2023 finds from Ethiopia were reported dating to 1.95 million years ago. The earliest user of Acheulean tools may have been Homo ergaster, who first appeared about 1.8 million years ago (not all researchers use this formal name, and instead prefer to call these users early Homo erectus). However, it is impossible to know for sure whether Homo ergaster was the only maker of early Acheulean tools, since other hominin species, such as Homo habilis, also lived in East Africa at this time.
From geological dating of sedimentary deposits, it appears that the Acheulean originated in Africa and spread to Asian, Middle Eastern, and European areas sometime between 1.5 million years ago and about 800 thousand years ago. In individual regions, this dating can be considerably refined; in Europe for example, it was thought that Acheulean methods did not reach the continent until around 500,000 years ago. However, more recent research demonstrated that hand-axes from Spain were made more than 900,000 years ago.
Relative dating techniques (based on a presumption that technology progresses over time) suggest that Acheulean tools followed on from earlier, cruder tool-making methods, but there is considerable chronological overlap in early prehistoric stone-working industries, with evidence in some regions that Acheulean tool-using groups were contemporary with other, less sophisticated industries such as the Clactonian and then later with the more sophisticated Mousterian, as well. It is therefore important not to see the Acheulean as a neatly defined period or one that happened as part of a clear sequence but as one tool-making technique that flourished especially well in early prehistory. The enormous geographic spread of Acheulean techniques also makes the name unwieldy as it represents numerous regional variations on a similar theme. The term Acheulean does not represent a common culture in the modern sense, rather it is a basic method for making stone tools that was shared across much of the Old World.
In Europe, the more advanced Mousterian utilizing the Levallois technique appeared around 320,000 years ago, and had displaced the Acheulean in Europe and the Middle East by around 125,000 years ago. The Acheulean had also disappeared from Africa by this time. The Acheulean may have lasted much later, until around 50,000 years ago in East Asia.
Acheulean stone tools
Stages
In the four divisions of prehistoric stone-working, Acheulean artefacts are classified as Mode 2, meaning they are more advanced than the (usually earlier) Mode 1 tools of the Clactonian or Oldowan/Abbevillian industries but lacking the sophistication of the (usually later) Mode 3 Middle Palaeolithic technology, exemplified by the Mousterian industry.
The Mode 1 industries created rough flake tools by hitting a suitable stone with a hammerstone. The resulting flake that broke off would have a natural sharp edge for cutting and could afterwards be sharpened further by striking another smaller flake from the edge if necessary (known as "retouch"). These early toolmakers may also have worked the stone they took the flake from (known as a core) to create chopper cores although there is some debate over whether these items were tools or just discarded cores.
Advanced, later Acheulean toolmakers supplemented stone-on-stone percussion by utilizing "soft hammer" percussion using bone, antler, or wood tools. These type of hammers, compared to stone, yields more control over the shape of the finished tool, and can be used to resharpen blunted tools. The oldest locality showing evidence of "soft hammer" percussion in Eurasia is the Boxgrove site in southern England, dating to around 480,000 years ago. Soft hammer percussion may have emerged around the same time in Africa. Unlike the earlier Mode 1 industries, it was the core that was prized over the flakes that came from it. Another advance was that the Mode 2 tools were worked symmetrically and on both sides indicating greater care in the production of the final tool.
Mode 3 technology emerged towards the end of Acheulean dominance and involved the Levallois technique, most famously exploited by the Mousterian industry. Transitional tool forms between the two are called Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition, or MTA types. The long blades of the Upper Palaeolithic Mode 4 industries appeared long after the Acheulean was abandoned.
As the period of Acheulean tool use is so vast, efforts have been made to classify various stages of it such as John Wymer's division into Early Acheulean, Middle Acheulean, Late Middle Acheulean and Late Acheulean for material from Britain. These schemes are normally regional and their dating and interpretations vary.
In Africa, there is a distinct difference in the tools made before and after 600,000 years ago with the older group being thicker and less symmetric and the younger being more extensively trimmed.
Manufacture
The primary innovation associated with Acheulean hand-axes is that the stone was worked symmetrically and on both sides. For the latter reason, handaxes are, along with cleavers, bifacially worked tools that could be manufactured from the large flakes themselves or from prepared cores.
Tool types found in Acheulean assemblages include pointed, cordate, ovate, ficron, and bout-coupé hand-axes (referring to the shapes of the final tool), cleavers, retouched flakes, scrapers, and segmental chopping tools. Materials used were determined by available local stone types; flint is most often associated with the tools but its use is concentrated in Western Europe; in Africa sedimentary and igneous rock such as mudstone and basalt were most widely used, for example. Other source materials include chalcedony, quartzite, andesite, sandstone, chert, and shale. Even relatively soft rock such as limestone could be exploited. In all cases the toolmakers worked their handaxes close to the source of their raw materials, suggesting that the Acheulean was a set of skills passed between individual groups.
Some smaller tools were made from large flakes that had been struck from stone cores. These flake tools and the distinctive waste flakes produced in Acheulean tool manufacture suggest a more considered technique, one that required the toolmaker to think one or two steps ahead during work that necessitated a clear sequence of steps to create perhaps several tools in one sitting.
A hard hammerstone would first be used to rough out the shape of the tool from the stone by removing large flakes. These large flakes might be re-used to create tools. The tool maker would work around the circumference of the remaining stone core, removing smaller flakes alternately from each face. The scar created by the removal of the preceding flake would provide a striking platform for the removal of the next. Misjudged blows or flaws in the material used could cause problems, but a skilled toolmaker could overcome them.
Once the roughout shape was created, a further phase of flaking was undertaken to make the tool thinner. The thinning flakes were removed using a softer hammer, such as bone or antler. The softer hammer required more careful preparation of the striking platform and this would be abraded using a coarse stone to ensure the hammer did not slide off when struck.
Final shaping was then applied to the usable cutting edge of the tool, again using fine removal of flakes. Some Acheulean tools were sharpened instead by the removal of a tranchet flake. This was struck from the lateral edge of the hand-axe close to the intended cutting area, resulting in the removal of a flake running along (parallel to) the blade of the axe to create a neat and very sharp working edge. This distinctive tranchet flake can be identified amongst flint-knapping debris at Acheulean sites.
Use
Loren Eiseley calculated that Acheulean tools have an average useful cutting edge of 20 centimetres (8 inches), making them much more efficient than the 5 centimetres (2 inches) average of Oldowan tools.
A wear analysis of handaxes from the 480,000 year old late Acheulean Boxgrove site in England found that they were primarily if not exclusively used for animal butchery, with no evidence for their use in woodworking or digging.
Alternative theories include a use for ovate hand-axes as a kind of hunting discus to be hurled at prey. Puzzlingly, there are also examples of sites where hundreds of hand-axes, many impractically large and also apparently unused, have been found in close association together. Sites such as Melka Kunturé in Ethiopia, Olorgesailie in Kenya, Isimila in Tanzania, and Kalambo Falls in Zambia have produced evidence that suggests Acheulean hand-axes might not always have had a functional purpose.
Recently, it has been suggested that the Acheulean tool users adopted the handaxe as a social artifact, meaning that it embodied something beyond its function of a butchery or wood cutting tool. Knowing how to create and use these tools would have been a valuable skill and the more elaborate ones suggest that they played a role in their owners' identity and their interactions with others. This would help explain the apparent over-sophistication of some examples which may represent a "historically accrued social significance".
One theory goes further and suggests that some special hand-axes were made and displayed by males in search of a mate, using a large, well-made hand-axe to demonstrate that they possessed sufficient strength and skill to pass on to their offspring. Once they had attracted a female at a group gathering, it is suggested that they would discard their axes, perhaps explaining why so many are found together. This popular sexual selection hypothesis is controversial due to the assumptions made about sexual selection among extinct organisms.
Stone knapping with limited digital dexterity makes the center of mass the required direction of flake removal. Physics then dictates a circular or oval end pattern, similar to the handaxe, for a leftover core after flake production. This would explain the abundance, wide distribution, proximity to source, consistent shape, and lack of actual use, of these artifacts.
Mimi Lam, a researcher from the University of British Columbia, has suggested that Acheulean hand-axes became "the first commodity: A marketable good or service that has value and is used as an item for exchange."
Distribution
The geographic distribution of Acheulean tools – and thus the peoples who made them – is often interpreted as being the result of palaeo-climatic and ecological factors, such as glaciation and the desertification of the Sahara Desert.
Acheulean stone tools have been found across the continent of Africa, save for the dense rainforest around the Congo River which is not thought to have been colonized by hominids until later. It is thought that from Africa their use spread north and east to Asia: from Anatolia, through the Arabian Peninsula, across modern day Iran and Pakistan, and into India, and beyond. In Europe their users reached the Pannonian Basin and the western Mediterranean regions, modern day France, the Low Countries, western Germany, and southern and central Britain.
Areas further north did not see human occupation until much later, due to glaciation. In Athirampakkam at Chennai in Tamil Nadu the Acheulean age started at 1.51 mya and it is also prior than North India and Europe.
Until the 1980s, it was thought that the humans who arrived in East Asia abandoned the hand-axe technology of their ancestors and adopted chopper tools instead. An apparent division between Acheulean and non-Acheulean tool industries was identified by Hallam L. Movius, who drew the Movius Line across northern India to show where the traditions seemed to diverge. Later finds of Acheulean tools at Chongokni in South Korea and also in Mongolia and China, however, cast doubt on the reliability of Movius's distinction. Since then, a different division known as the Roe Line has been suggested. This runs across North Africa to Israel and thence to India, separating two different techniques used by Acheulean toolmakers. North and east of the Roe Line, Acheulean hand-axes were made directly from large stone nodules and cores; while, to the south and west, they were made from flakes struck from these nodules.
Possible Acheulean-like bifacial technologies have also been discussed in relation to the Arubo 1 site in General Tinio, Nueva Ecija, Philippines, where archaeologists recovered a proto-handaxe and bifacial cleaver made from locally sourced chert. Pawlik noted that the proto-handaxe "would certainly be regarded as typical for the Early Acheulean" if found in regions traditionally associated with Acheulean industries. The assemblage has been cited in broader discussions regarding the diversity of bifacial technologies in Southeast Asia and the limitations of strict interpretations of the Movius Line.
Acheulean tool users
Most notably, however, it is Homo ergaster (sometimes called early Homo erectus), whose assemblages are almost exclusively Acheulean, who used the technique. Later, the related species Homo heidelbergensis (the common ancestor of both Neanderthals and Homo sapiens) used it extensively.
Late Acheulean tools were still used by species derived from H. erectus, including Homo sapiens idaltu and early Neanderthals.
The symmetry of the hand-axes has been used to suggest that Acheulean tool users possessed the ability to use language; the parts of the brain connected with fine control and movement are located in the same region that controls speech. The wider variety of tool types compared to earlier industries and their aesthetically as well as functionally pleasing form could indicate a higher intellectual level in Acheulean tool users than in earlier hominines. Others argue that there is no correlation between spatial abilities in tool making and linguistic behaviour, and that language is not learned or conceived in the same manner as artefact manufacture.
Lower Palaeolithic finds made in association with Acheulean hand-axes, such as the Venus of Berekhat Ram, have been used to argue for artistic expression amongst the tool users. The incised elephant tibia from Bilzingsleben in Germany, and ochre finds from Kapthurin in Kenya and Duinefontein in South Africa, are sometimes cited as being some of the earliest examples of an aesthetic sensibility in human history. There are numerous other explanations put forward for the creation of these artefacts; however, evidence of human art did not become commonplace until around 50,000 years ago, after the emergence of modern Homo sapiens.
The kill site at Boxgrove in England is another famous Acheulean site. Up until the 1970s these kill sites, often at waterholes where animals would gather to drink, were interpreted as being where Acheulean tool users killed game, butchered their carcasses, and then discarded the tools they had used. Since the advent of zooarchaeology, which has placed greater emphasis on studying animal bones from archaeological sites, this view has changed. Many of the animals at these kill sites have been found to have been killed by other predator animals, so it is likely that humans of the period supplemented hunting with scavenging from already dead animals.
Excavations at the Bnot Ya'akov Bridge site, located along the Dead Sea rift in the southern Hula Valley of northern Israel, have revealed evidence of human habitation in the area from as early as 750,000 years ago. Archaeologists from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem claim that the site provides evidence of "advanced human behavior" half a million years earlier than has previously been estimated. Their report describes an Acheulean layer at the site in which numerous stone tools, animal bones, and plant remains have been found.
Azykh cave located in Azerbaijan is another site where Acheulean tools were found. In 1968, a lower jaw of a new type of hominid was discovered in the fifth layer (so-called Acheulean layer) of the cave. Specialists named this type "Azykhantropus".
Only limited artefactual evidence survives of the users of Acheulean tools other than the stone tools themselves. Cave sites were exploited for habitation, but the hunter-gatherers of the Palaeolithic also possibly built shelters such as those identified in connection with Acheulean tools at Grotte du Lazaret and Terra Amata near Nice in France. The presence of the shelters is inferred from large rocks at the sites, which may have been used to weigh down the bottoms of tent-like structures or serve as foundations for huts or windbreaks. These stones may have been naturally deposited. In any case, a flimsy wood or animal skin structure would leave few archaeological traces after so much time. Fire was seemingly being exploited by Homo ergaster, and would have been a necessity in colonising colder Eurasia from Africa. Conclusive evidence of mastery over it this early is, however, difficult to find.

Acicular ferrite is a microstructure of ferrite in steel that is characterised by needle-shaped crystallites or grains when viewed in two dimensions. The grains, actually three-dimensional in shape, have a thin lenticular shape. This microstructure is advantageous over other microstructures for steel because of its chaotic ordering, which increases toughness.
Acicular ferrite is formed in the interior of the original austenitic grains by direct nucleation on the inclusions, resulting in randomly oriented short ferrite needles with a 'basket weave' appearance. Acicular ferrite is also characterised by high angle boundaries between the ferrite grains. This further reduces the chance of cleavage, because these boundaries impede crack propagation.
In C-Mn steel weld metals, it is reported that nucleation of various ferrite morphologies is aided by non-metallic inclusion; in particular oxygen-rich inclusions of a certain type and size are associated with the intragranular nucleation of acicular ferrite. Acicular ferrite is a fine Widmanstätten constituent, which is nucleated by an optimum intragranular dispersion of oxide/sulfide/silicate particles. The interlocking nature of acicular ferrite, together with its fine grain size (0.5 to 5 μm with aspect ratio from 3:1 to 10:1), provides maximum resistance to crack propagation by cleavage.
Composition control of weld metal is often performed to maximise the volume fraction of acicular ferrite due to the toughness it imparts. During continuous cooling, higher alloy contents or faster cooling generally delay transformation, which will then take place at lower temperatures, below the bainite start temperature, and lead to higher hardness. The efficacy of inclusions as nucleation sites in modern low alloy steel weld metals is such that fine-scale intragranular bainite can nucleate on them, both by continuous cooling and by isothermal transformation below the bainite start temperature. Some confusion has arisen in the literature, as this fine-scale intragranular bainite, which can resemble acicular ferrite in appearance in the optical microscope, has been called acicular ferrite by some researchers. See, for example.

The Act+Fast Anti Choking Trainer, also known as the “Choking Rescue Training Vest”, is a simulation device manufactured by Act+Fast LLC, a company based in California. It helps practice choking rescue techniques and is mainly used in basic airway management to teach choking rescue protocols, abdominal thrusts (Heimlich maneuver) and the back slap method. The Anti Choking Trainer was exhibited at the 2008 EMS Expo in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Origin
The Act+Fast Anti Choking Trainer was first developed in 2008 by Dr. Timothy Adams after volunteering to help train Boy Scouts in the Heimlich maneuver using operating room supplies. It was subsequently implemented in CPR classes, hospitals, and schools.
Operation
The Anti Choking Trainer is worn as a vest to simulate relief of an obstruction. The vest is slipped over the user’s head and secured with a buckle on each side. In front of the vest, is a neoprene pocket with a plastic air bladder that rests in the area between the user’s navel and rib cage. At the top of the bladder is a rigid airway with an opening that points upward and away from the user’s face. A foam plug is placed in the airway to simulate a foreign body airway obstruction (FBAO). When the proper technique is performed, the foam plug is launched into the air, providing immediate feedback. The Anti Choking Trainer also includes a foam back pad for backslaps. The Anti Choking Trainer allows users to practice the choking rescue protocols of the European Resuscitation Council, National Safety Council and International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movements around the world.
Reception and recognition
The Anti Choking Trainer has been used by schools, fire departments, rescue groups and in CPR training classes.
In 2009 the Anti Choking trainer was named by the Journal of Emergency Medicine as one of 30 of the most innovative products at the 27th annual EMS Today.

Activated carbon, also called activated charcoal, is a form of carbon commonly used to filter contaminants from water and air, among many other uses. It is processed (activated) to have small, low-volume pores that greatly increase the surface area available for adsorption or chemical reactions. (Adsorption, not to be confused with absorption, is a process where atoms or molecules adhere to a surface). The pores can be thought of as a microscopic "sponge" structure. Activation is analogous to making popcorn from dried corn kernels: popcorn is light, fluffy, and its kernels have a high surface-area-to-volume ratio. Activated is sometimes replaced by active.
Because it is so porous on a microscopic scale, activated carbon has a surface area of over 3,000 square metres per gram (920,000 square feet per ounce), as determined by gas absorption and its porosity can run 10ML/day in terms of treated water per gram. Researchers at Cornell University synthesized an ultrahigh surface area activated carbon with a BET area of 4,800 m2/g (1,500,000 sq ft/oz). This BET area value is the highest reported in the literature for activated carbon. For charcoal, the equivalent figure before activation is about 2–5 square metres per gram (610–1,530 sq ft/oz). A useful activation level may be obtained solely from high surface area. Further chemical treatment often enhances adsorption properties.
Activated carbon is usually derived from waste products such as coconut husks in addition to other agricultural wastes like olive stones, rice husks and nutshells which are being upcycled into activated carbon, diversifying feedstock supply. Waste from paper mills has been studied as a possible source of activated carbon. These bulk sources are converted into charcoal before being activated. Using waste streams not only reduces landfill burden but also works to lower the overall carbon footprint as previously discarded waste is repurposed. When derived from coal, it is referred to as activated coal. Activated coke is derived from coke. In activated-coke production, the raw coke (most commonly petroleum coke) is ground or pelletized, then "activated" via physical (steam or CO2 at high temperature) or chemical (e.g., KOH or H3PO4) methods to introduce a porous network, yielding a high-surface-area adsorbent which is referred to as activated coal.
Uses
Activated carbon is used in methane and hydrogen storage, air purification, capacitive deionization, supercapacitive swing adsorption, solvent recovery, decaffeination, gold purification, metal extraction, water purification, medicine, sewage treatment, air filters in respirators, filters in compressed air, teeth whitening, production of hydrogen chloride, edible electronics, and many other applications. These multiuse applications make it a versatile form of carbon that is used daily in many industries.
Industrial
There are many industrial applications of activated carbon and its other forms such as areas like metal extraction, water purification, sewage treatment, metal finishing and more. For example, it is the main purification technique for removing organic impurities from bright nickel plating solutions used for metal finishing plants. Expanding on electroplating, a variety of organic chemicals can be added to the plating solutions for improving their deposit qualities and for enhancing properties like brightness, smoothness, ductility, etc. This is due to the passage of direct current and electrolytic reactions of anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction, organic additives generate unwanted breakdown products in solution. Their excessive build up in the solutions can adversely affect plating quality and physical properties of deposited metal if run untreated by the filters. Activated carbon treatment removes such impurities and restores plating performance to the desired level. Its installation costs may vary according to the volume of water it must process, however the average cost can be around USD 1 - 2 million. Additionally, these filters need replacing over time (typically 6–12 months depending on usage). The cost of replacing the carbon in the GAC filter form is about USD 0.05 - 0.1 per cubic meter of water that is treated in the plant.
Medical
Activated carbon is used to treat poisonings and overdoses following oral ingestion. Tablets or capsules of activated carbon are used in many countries as an over-the-counter drug to treat diarrhea, indigestion, and flatulence. However, activated charcoal shows no effect on intestinal gas and diarrhea, is ordinarily medically ineffective if poisoning resulted from ingestion of corrosive agents, boric acid, or petroleum products, and is particularly ineffective against poisonings of strong acids or bases, cyanide, iron, lithium, arsenic, methanol, ethanol, or ethylene glycol. Activated carbon will not prevent these chemicals from being absorbed into the human body. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines.
Incorrect application (e.g. into the lungs) results in pulmonary aspiration, which can sometimes be fatal if immediate medical treatment is not initiated.
Analytical chemistry
Activated carbon, in 50% w/w combination with celite, is used as stationary phase in low-pressure chromatographic separation of carbohydrates (mono-, di-, tri-saccharides) using ethanol solutions (5–50%) as mobile phase in analytical or preparative protocols.
Activated carbon is useful for extracting the direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) such as dabigatran, apixaban, rivaroxaban and edoxaban from blood plasma samples. For this purpose it has been made into "minitablets", each containing 5 mg activated carbon for treating 1ml samples of DOAC. Since this activated carbon has no effect on blood clotting factors, heparin or most other anticoagulants this allows a plasma sample to be analyzed for abnormalities otherwise affected by the DOACs.
Environmental
Carbon adsorption has numerous applications in removing pollutants from air or water streams both in the field and in industrial processes such as:
Spill cleanup
Groundwater remediation
Drinking water filtration
Wastewater treatment
Air purification
Volatile organic compounds capture from painting, dry cleaning, gasoline dispensing operations, and other processes
Volatile organic compounds recovery (SRU, Solvent Recovery Unit; SRP, Solvent Recovery Plant; SRS, Solvent Recovery System) from flexible packaging, converting, coating, and other processes.
During early implementation of the 1974 Safe Drinking Water Act in the US, EPA officials developed a rule that proposed requiring drinking water treatment systems to use granular activated carbon. Because of its high cost, the so-called GAC rule encountered strong opposition across the country from the water supply industry, including the largest water utilities in California. Hence, the agency set aside the rule. Activated carbon filtration is an effective water treatment method due to its multi-functional nature. There are specific types of activated carbon filtration methods and equipment that are indicated – depending upon the contaminants involved.
In wastewater treatment, granulated activated carbon filters are implemented as an additional treatment step for removal of organic micropollutants such as pharmaceutical products, many of which are not entirely removed in traditional wastewater treatment processes. Pollutants adsorb to the activated carbon granules and are then degraded by microorganisms on the filters.
Activated carbon is also used for the measurement of radon concentration in air.
Biomass waste-derived activated carbons were also successfully used for the removal of caffeine and paracetamol from water.
Agricultural
Activated carbon (charcoal) is an allowed substance used by organic farmers in both livestock production and wine making. In livestock production it is used as a pesticide, animal feed additive, processing aid, nonagricultural ingredient and disinfectant. In organic winemaking, activated carbon is allowed for use as a processing agent to adsorb brown color pigments from white grape concentrates.
It is sometimes used as biochar.
Distilled alcoholic beverage purification
Activated carbon filters (AC filters) can be used to filter vodka and whiskey of organic impurities which can affect color, taste, and odor. Passing an organically impure vodka through an activated carbon filter at the proper flow rate will result in vodka with an identical alcohol content and significantly increased organic purity, as judged by odor and taste.
Fuel storage
Research is being done testing various activated carbons' ability to store natural gas and hydrogen gas. The porous material acts like a sponge for different types of gases. The gas is attracted to the carbon material via Van der Waals forces. Some carbons have been able to achieve binding energies of 5–10 kJ per mol. The gas may then be desorbed when subjected to higher temperatures and either combusted to do work or in the case of hydrogen gas extracted for use in a hydrogen fuel cell. Gas storage in activated carbons is an appealing gas storage method because the gas can be stored in a low pressure, low mass, low volume environment that would be much more feasible than bulky on-board pressure tanks in vehicles. The United States Department of Energy has specified certain goals to be achieved in the area of research and development of nano-porous carbon materials. All of the goals are yet to be satisfied but numerous institutions, including the ALL-CRAFT program, are continuing to conduct work in this field.
Gas purification
Filters with activated carbon are usually used in compressed air and gas purification to remove oil vapors, odor, and other hydrocarbons from the air. The most common designs use a 1-stage or 2 stage filtration principle in which activated carbon is embedded inside the filter media.
Activated carbon filters are used to retain radioactive gases within the air vacuumed from a nuclear boiling water reactor turbine condenser. The large charcoal beds adsorb these gases and retain them while they rapidly decay to nonradioactive solid species. The solids are trapped in the charcoal particles, while the filtered air passes through.
Chemical purification
Activated carbon is commonly used on the laboratory scale to purify solutions of organic molecules containing unwanted colored organic impurities.
Filtration over activated carbon is used in large scale fine chemical and pharmaceutical processes for the same purpose. The carbon is either mixed with the solution then filtered off or immobilized in a filter.
Mercury scrubbing
Activated carbon, often infused with sulfur or iodine, is widely used to trap mercury emissions from coal-fired power stations, medical incinerators, and from natural gas at the wellhead. However, despite its effectiveness, activated carbon is expensive to use.
Since it is often not recycled, the mercury-laden activated carbon presents a disposal dilemma. If the activated carbon contains less than 260 ppm mercury, United States federal regulations allow it to be stabilized (for example, trapped in concrete) for landfilling. However, waste containing greater than 260 ppm is considered to be in the high-mercury subcategory and is banned from landfilling (Land-Ban Rule). This material is now accumulating in warehouses and in deep abandoned mines at an estimated rate of 100 tons per year.
The problem of disposal of mercury-laden activated carbon is not unique to the United States. In the Netherlands, this mercury is largely recovered and the activated carbon is disposed of by complete burning, forming carbon dioxide (CO2).
Food additive
Activated, food-grade charcoal became a food trend in 2016, being used as an additive to impart a "slightly smoky" taste and a dark coloring to products including hotdogs, ice cream, pizza bases, and bagels. People taking medication, including birth control pills and antidepressants, are advised to avoid novelty foods or drinks that use activated charcoal coloring since it can render the medication ineffective.
Smoking filtration
Activated charcoal is used in smoking filters as a way to reduce the tar content and other chemicals present in smoke, which is a result of combustion, wherein it has been found to reduce the toxicants from tobacco smoke, in particular the free radicals.
Structure of activated carbon
The structure of activated carbon has long been a subject of debate. In a book published in 2006, Harry Marsh and Francisco Rodríguez-Reinoso considered more than 15 models for the structure, without coming to a definite conclusion about which was correct. Recent work using aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy has suggested that activated carbons may have a structure related to that of the fullerenes, with pentagonal and heptagonal carbon rings.
Production
Activated carbon is carbon produced from carbonaceous source materials such as bamboo, coconut husk, willow peat, wood, coir, lignite, coal, and petroleum pitch. It can be produced (activated) by one of the following processes:
Physical activation: The source material is developed into activated carbon using hot gases. Air is then introduced to burn out the gases, creating a graded, screened and de-dusted form of activated carbon. This is generally done by using one or more of the following processes:
Carbonization: Material with carbon content is pyrolyzed at temperatures in the range 600–900 °C, usually in an inert atmosphere with gases such as argon or nitrogen
Activation/oxidation: Raw material or carbonized material is exposed to oxidizing atmospheres (oxygen or steam) at temperatures above 250 °C, usually in the temperature range of 600–1200 °C. The activation is performed by heating the sample for 1 h in a muffle furnace at 450 °C in the presence of air.
Chemical activation: The carbon material is impregnated with certain chemicals. The chemical is typically an acid, strong base, or a salt (phosphoric acid 25%, potassium hydroxide 5%, sodium hydroxide 5%, potassium carbonate 5%, calcium chloride 25%, and zinc chloride 25%). The carbon is then subjected to high temperatures (250–600 °C). It is believed that the temperature activates the carbon at this stage by forcing the material to open up and have more microscopic pores. Chemical activation is preferred to physical activation owing to the lower temperatures, better quality consistency, and shorter time needed for activating the material.
The Dutch company Norit NV is one of the largest producer of activated carbon in the world. Haycarb, a Sri Lankan coconut shell-based company, controls 16% of the global market share.
Regeneration & Sustainability
After adsorption, spent granular activated carbon can often be regenerated rather than discarded. Thermal reactivation (heating in an inert or steam atmosphere at 800–900 °C) restores much of the pore structure but consumes significant energy, while chemical regeneration (e.g. with dilute acids or bases) can selectively remove fouling compounds under milder conditions. Emerging methods like microwave-assisted reactivation and bio-regeneration using fungi or bacteria show promise for lower-carbon footprints. Choosing the optimal regeneration route balances carbon lifespan, energy use and treatment costs, and helps minimize the volume of hazardous waste sent to landfill.
Classification
Activated carbons are complex products which are difficult to classify on the basis of their behaviour, surface characteristics and other fundamental criteria. However, some broad classification is made for general purposes based on their size, preparation methods, and industrial applications.
Powdered activated carbon (PAC)
Normally, activated carbons (R 1) are made in particulate form as powders or fine granules less than 1.0 mm in size with an average diameter between 0.15 and 0.25 mm. Thus they present a large surface to volume ratio with a small diffusion distance. Activated carbon (R 1) is defined as the activated carbon particles retained on a 50-mesh sieve (0.297 mm).
Powdered activated carbon (PAC) material is finer material. PAC is made up of crushed or ground carbon particles, 95–100% of which will pass through a designated mesh sieve. The ASTM classifies particles passing through an 80-mesh sieve (0.177 mm) and smaller as PAC. It is not common to use PAC in a dedicated vessel, due to the high head loss that would occur. Instead, PAC is generally added directly to other process units, such as raw water intakes, rapid mix basins, clarifiers, and gravity filters.
Granular activated carbon (GAC)
Granular activated carbon (GAC) has a relatively larger particle size compared to powdered activated carbon and consequently, presents a smaller external surface. Diffusion of the adsorbate is thus an important factor. These carbons are suitable for adsorption of gases, vapors and liquids, because these substances diffuse rapidly throughout the filters. Granulated carbons are used for air filtration and water treatment, as well as for general deodorization and separation of components in flow systems and in rapid mix basins. GAC can be obtained in either granular or extruded form. GAC is designated by sizes such as 8×20, 20×40, or 8×30 for liquid phase applications and 4×6, 4×8 or 4×10 for vapor phase applications. A 20×40 carbon is made of particles that will pass through a U.S. Standard Mesh Size No. 20 sieve (0.84 mm) (generally specified as 85% passing) but be retained on a U.S. Standard Mesh Size No. 40 sieve (0.42 mm) (generally specified as 95% retained). AWWA (1992) B604 uses the 50-mesh sieve (0.297 mm) as the minimum GAC size. The most popular aqueous-phase carbons are the 12×40 and 8×30 sizes because they have a good balance of size, surface area, and head loss characteristics.
Extruded activated carbon (EAC)
Extruded activated carbon (EAC) combines powdered activated carbon with a binder, which are fused together and extruded into a cylindrical shaped activated carbon block with diameters from 0.8 to 130 mm. These are mainly used for gas phase applications because of their low pressure drop, high mechanical strength and low dust content. Also sold as CTO filter (Chlorine, Taste, Odor).
Bead activated carbon (BAC)
Bead activated carbon (BAC) is manufactured from carbonizing petroleum pitch and then activating it into uniform spheres in diameters from approximately 0.35 to 0.80 mm. BAC typically exhibits a surface area in the range of 800–1 200 m2/g, comparable to or exceeding many granular carbons, enhancing its capacity for dissolved organics. Similar to EAC, it is also noted for its low pressure drop, high mechanical strength and low dust content, but with a smaller grain size. Its spherical shape makes it preferred for fluidized bed applications such as water filtration.
Impregnated carbon
Porous carbons containing several types of inorganic impregnate such as iodine and silver. Cations such as aluminium, manganese, zinc, iron, lithium, and calcium have also been prepared for specific application in air pollution control especially in museums and galleries. Due to its antimicrobial and antiseptic properties, silver loaded activated carbon is used as an adsorbent for purification of domestic water. Drinking water can be obtained from natural water by treating the natural water with a mixture of activated carbon and aluminium hydroxide (Al(OH)3), a flocculating agent. Impregnated carbons are also used for the adsorption of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and thiols. Adsorption rates for H2S as high as 50% by weight have been reported.
Polymer coated carbon
This is a process by which a porous carbon can be coated with a biocompatible polymer to give a smooth and permeable coat without blocking the pores. The typical film thickness ranges from 50 to 200 nm, which strikes a balance between preserving pore access and ensuring mechanical stability in the material. The resulting carbon is useful for hemoperfusion. Hemoperfusion is a treatment technique in which large volumes of the patient's blood are passed over an adsorbent substance in order to remove toxic substances from the blood. In clinical trials, polymer-coated carbons have achieved over 80% removal of toxins such as bilirubin and certain drug metabolites in a single pass.
Woven carbon
There is a technology of processing technical rayon fiber into activated carbon cloth for carbon filtering. Adsorption capacity of activated cloth is greater than that of activated charcoal (BET theory) surface area: 500–1500 m2/g, pore volume: 0.3–0.8 cm3/g). Thanks to the different forms of activated material, it can be used in a wide range of applications (supercapacitors, odor absorbers, CBRN-defense industry etc.).
Properties
A gram of activated carbon can have a surface area in excess of 500 m2 (5,400 sq ft), with 3,000 m2 (32,000 sq ft) being readily achievable. Carbon aerogels, while more expensive, have even higher surface areas, and are used in special applications.
Under an electron microscope, the high surface-area structures of activated carbon are revealed. Individual particles are intensely convoluted and display various kinds of porosity; there may be many areas where flat surfaces of graphite-like material run parallel to each other, separated by only a few nanometres or so. These micropores provide superb conditions for adsorption to occur, since adsorbing material can interact with many surfaces simultaneously. Tests of adsorption behaviour are usually done with nitrogen gas at 77 K under high vacuum, but in everyday terms activated carbon is perfectly capable of producing the equivalent, by adsorption from its environment, liquid water from steam at 100 °C (212 °F) and a pressure of 1/10,000 of an atmosphere.
James Dewar, the scientist after whom the Dewar (vacuum flask) is named, spent much time in the early 20th century studying activated carbon, and published a paper regarding its adsorption capacity with regard to gases. In this paper, he discovered that cooling the carbon to liquid nitrogen temperatures allowed it to adsorb significant quantities of numerous air gases, among others, that could then be recollected by simply allowing the carbon to warm again and that coconut-based carbon was superior for the effect. He uses oxygen as an example, wherein the activated carbon would typically adsorb the atmospheric concentration (21%) under standard conditions, but release over 80% oxygen if the carbon was first cooled to low temperatures.
Physically, activated carbon binds materials by van der Waals force or London dispersion force.
Activated carbon does not bind well to certain chemicals, including alcohols, diols, strong acids and bases, metals and most inorganics, such as lithium, sodium, iron, lead, arsenic, fluorine, and boric acid.
Activated carbon can also adsorb iodine very well. The iodine capacity, mg/g, (ASTM D28 Standard Method test) may be used as an indication of total adsorption over the surface area of the testing material.
Carbon monoxide however, is not very well adsorbed by activated carbon. This should be of particular concern to those using the material in filters for respirators, fume hoods, or other gas control systems because the gas is undetectable to the human senses, toxic to the metabolism, and neurotoxic which creates concern.
Substantial lists of the common industrial and agricultural gases adsorbed by activated carbon can be found online.
Activated carbon can be used as a substrate for the application of various chemicals to improve the adsorptive capacity for some inorganic (and problematic organic) compounds such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S), ammonia (NH3), formaldehyde (HCOH), mercury (Hg) and radioactive iodine-131(131I). This property is known as chemisorption.
Iodine number
Many carbons preferentially adsorb small molecules. Iodine number is the most fundamental parameter used to characterize activated carbon performance.
It is a measure of activity level (higher number indicates higher degree of activation) often reported in mg/g (typical range 500–1200 mg/g).
It is a measure of the micropore content of the activated carbon (0 to 20 Å, or up to 2 nm) by adsorption of iodine from solution.
It is equivalent to surface area of carbon between 900 and 1100 m2/g.
It is the standard measure for liquid-phase applications.
Iodine number is defined as the milligrams of iodine adsorbed by one gram of carbon when the iodine concentration in the residual filtrate is at a concentration of 0.02 normal (i.e. 0.02N). Basically, iodine number is a measure of the iodine adsorbed in the pores and, as such, is an indication of the pore volume available in the activated carbon of interest. Typically, water-treatment carbons have iodine numbers ranging from 600 to 1100. Frequently, this parameter is used to determine the degree of exhaustion of a carbon in use. However, this practice should be viewed with caution, as chemical interactions with the adsorbate may affect the iodine uptake, giving false results. Thus, the use of iodine number as a measure of the degree of exhaustion of a carbon bed can only be recommended if it has been shown to be free of chemical interactions with adsorbates and if an experimental correlation between iodine number and the degree of exhaustion has been determined for the particular application.
Molasses
Some carbons are more adept at adsorbing large molecules.
Molasses number or molasses efficiency is a measure of the mesopore content of the activated carbon (greater than 20 Å, or larger than 2 nm) by adsorption of molasses from solution.
A high molasses number indicates a high adsorption of big molecules (range 95–600). Caramel dp (decolorizing performance) is similar to molasses number. Molasses efficiency is reported as a percentage (range 40%–185%) and parallels molasses number (600 = 185%, 425 = 85%).
The European molasses number (range 525–110) is inversely related to the North American molasses number.
Molasses Number is a measure of the degree of decolorization of a standard molasses solution that has been diluted and standardized against standardized activated carbon. Due to the size of color bodies, the molasses number represents the potential pore volume available for larger adsorbing species. As all of the pore volume may not be available for adsorption in a particular waste water application, and as some of the adsorbate may enter smaller pores, it is not a good measure of the worth of a particular activated carbon for a specific application. Frequently, this parameter is useful in evaluating a series of active carbons for their rates of adsorption. Given two active carbons with similar pore volumes for adsorption, the one having the higher molasses number will usually have larger feeder pores resulting in more efficient transfer of adsorbate into the adsorption space.
Tannin
Tannins are a mixture of large and medium size molecules.
Carbons with a combination of macropores and mesopores adsorb tannins.
The ability of a carbon to adsorb tannins is reported in parts per million concentration (range 200 ppm–362 ppm).
Methylene blue
Some carbons have a mesopore (20 Å to 50 Å, or 2 to 5 nm) structure which adsorbs medium size molecules, such as the dye methylene blue.
Methylene blue adsorption is reported in g/100g (range 11–28 g/100g).
Dechlorination
Some carbons are evaluated based on the dechlorination half-life length, which measures the chlorine-removal efficiency of activated carbon. The dechlorination half-value length is the depth of carbon required to reduce the chlorine concentration by 50%. A lower half-value length indicates superior performance.
Apparent density
The solid or skeletal density of activated carbons will typically range between 2000 and 2100 kg/m3 (125–130 lbs./cubic foot). However, a large part of an activated carbon sample will consist of air space between particles, and the actual or apparent density will therefore be lower, typically 400 to 500 kg/m3 (25–31 lbs./cubic foot).
Higher density provides greater volume activity and normally indicates better-quality activated carbon.
ASTM D 2854 -09 (2014) is used to determine the apparent density of activated carbon.
Hardness/abrasion number
It is a measure of the activated carbon's resistance to attrition.
It is an important indicator of activated carbon to maintain its physical integrity and withstand frictional forces which would cause the material to be defective. There are large differences in the hardness of activated carbons, depending on the raw material and activity levels (porosity) it is created for.
Ash content
Ash reduces the overall activity of activated carbon and reduces the efficiency of reactivation. The amount is exclusively dependent on the base raw material used to produce the activated carbon (e.g., coconut, wood, coal, etc.).
The metal oxides (Fe2O3) can leach out of activated carbon resulting in discoloration. Acid/water-soluble ash content is more significant than total ash content. Soluble ash content can be very important for aquarists, as ferric oxide can promote algal growths. A carbon with a low soluble ash content should be used for marine, freshwater fish and reef tanks to avoid heavy metal poisoning and excess plant/algal growth.
ASTM (D2866 Standard Method test) is used to determine the ash content of activated carbon.
Carbon tetrachloride activity
Measurement of the porosity of an activated carbon by the adsorption of saturated carbon tetrachloride vapour.
Particle size distribution
The finer the particle size of an activated carbon, the better the access to the surface area and the faster the rate of adsorption kinetics. In vapour phase systems this needs to be considered against pressure drop, which will affect energy cost. Careful consideration of particle size distribution can provide significant operating benefits.
However, in the case of using activated carbon for adsorption of minerals such as gold, the particle size should be in the range of 3.35–1.4 millimetres (0.132–0.055 in). Activated carbon with particle size less than 1 mm would not be suitable for elution (the stripping of mineral from an activated carbon). Researchers at Cornell University synthesized an ultrahigh surface area activated carbon with a BET area of 4800 m2 g–1 and a total pore volume of 2.7 cm3 g–1. This BET area value is the highest reported in the literature for activated carbon to date.
Modification of properties and reactivity
Acid-base, oxidation-reduction and specific adsorption characteristics are strongly dependent on the composition of the surface functional groups.
The surface of conventional activated carbon is reactive, capable of oxidation by atmospheric oxygen and oxygen plasma steam, and also carbon dioxide and ozone.
Oxidation in the liquid phase is caused by a wide range of reagents (HNO3, H2O2, KMnO4).
Through the formation of a large number of basic and acidic groups on the surface of oxidized carbon to sorption and other properties can differ significantly from the unmodified forms.
Activated carbon can be nitrogenated by natural products or polymers or processing of carbon with nitrogenating reagents.
Activated carbon can interact with chlorine, bromine and fluorine.
Surface of activated carbon, like other carbon materials can be fluoralkylated by treatment with (per)fluoropolyether peroxide in a liquid phase, or with wide range of fluoroorganic substances by CVD-method. Such materials combine high hydrophobicity and chemical stability with electrical and thermal conductivity and can be used as electrode material for super capacitors.
Sulfonic acid functional groups can be attached to activated carbon to give "starbons" which can be used to selectively catalyse the esterification of fatty acids. Formation of such activated carbons from halogenated precursors gives a more effective catalyst which is thought to be a result of remaining halogens improving stability. It is reported about synthesis of activated carbon with chemically grafted superacid sites –CF2SO3H.
Some of the chemical properties of activated carbon have been attributed to presence of the surface active carbon double bond.
The Polyani adsorption theory is a popular method for analyzing adsorption of various organic substances to their surface.
Examples of adsorption
Heterogeneous catalysis
The most commonly encountered form of chemisorption in industry, occurs when a solid catalyst interacts with a gaseous feedstock, the reactant/s. The adsorption of reactant/s to the catalyst surface creates a chemical bond, altering the electron density around the reactant molecule and allowing it to undergo reactions that would not normally be available to it.
Reactivation and regeneration
The reactivation or the regeneration of activated carbons involves restoring the adsorptive capacity of saturated activated carbon by desorbing adsorbed contaminants on the activated carbon surface.
Thermal reactivation
The most common regeneration technique employed in industrial processes is thermal reactivation. The thermal regeneration process generally follows three steps:
Adsorbent drying at approximately 105 °C (221 °F)
High temperature desorption and decomposition (500–900 °C (932–1,652 °F)) under an inert atmosphere
Residual organic gasification by a non-oxidising gas (steam or carbon dioxide) at elevated temperatures (800 °C (1,470 °F))
The heat treatment stage utilises the exothermic nature of adsorption and results in desorption, partial cracking and polymerization of the adsorbed organics. The final step aims to remove charred organic residue formed in the porous structure in the previous stage and re-expose the porous carbon structure regenerating its original surface characteristics. After treatment the adsorption column can be reused. Per adsorption-thermal regeneration cycle between 5–15 wt% of the carbon bed is burnt off resulting in a loss of adsorptive capacity. Thermal regeneration is a high energy process due to the high required temperatures making it both an energetically and commercially expensive process. Plants that rely on thermal regeneration of activated carbon have to be of a certain size before it is economically viable to have regeneration facilities onsite. As a result, it is common for smaller waste treatment sites to ship their activated carbon cores to specialised facilities for regeneration.
Other regeneration techniques
Current concerns with the high energy/cost nature of thermal regeneration of activated carbon has encouraged research into alternative regeneration methods to reduce the environmental impact of such processes. Though several of the regeneration techniques cited have remained areas of purely academic research, some alternatives to thermal regeneration systems have been employed in industry. Current alternative regeneration methods are:
TSA (thermal swing adsorption) and/or PSA (pressure swing adsorption) processes: through convection (heat transfer) using steam, "hot" inert gas (typically heated nitrogen (150–250 °C (302–482 °F))), or vacuum (T+VSA or TVSA, combining TSA and VSA processes) in situ regeneration
MWR (microwave regeneration)
Chemical and solvent regeneration
Chemical and thermal regeneration
Microbial regeneration
Electrochemical regeneration
Ultrasonic regeneration
Wet air oxidation

Activated charcoal, also known as activated carbon, is a medication used to treat poisonings that occurred by mouth. To be effective it must be used within a short time of the poisoning occurring, typically an hour. It does not work for poisonings by cyanide, corrosive agents, iron, lithium, alcohols, or malathion. It may be taken by mouth or given by a nasogastric tube. Other uses include inside hemoperfusion machines.
Common side effects include vomiting, black stools, diarrhea, and constipation. A more serious side effect, pneumonitis, may result if aspirated into the lungs. Gastrointestinal obstruction and ileus are less common but serious adverse effects. Use in pregnancy and breastfeeding is generally safe. Activated charcoal works by adsorbing the toxin.
While charcoal has been used since ancient times for poisonings, activated charcoal has been used since the 1900s. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines.
Medical uses
Poison ingestion
Activated charcoal is used to treat many types of oral poisonings such as phenobarbital and carbamazepine. It is not effective for a number of poisonings including: strong acids or bases, iron, lithium, arsenic, methanol, ethanol or ethylene glycol.
Although activated charcoal is the most commonly used agent for GI decontamination in poisoned patients, medical professionals use discretion when determining whether or not its use is indicated. In a study of acute poisonings from agricultural pesticides and yellow oleander seeds, the administration of activated carbon did not affect survival rates.
Gastrointestinal tract-related issues
Charcoal biscuits were sold in England starting in the early 19th century, originally as remedy to flatulence and stomach trouble.
Tablets or capsules of activated carbon are used in many countries as an over-the-counter drug to treat diarrhea, indigestion, and flatulence. There is some evidence of its effectiveness to prevent diarrhea in cancer patients who have received irinotecan. It can interfere with the absorption of some medications, and lead to unreliable readings in medical tests such as the guaiac card test. Activated carbon is also used for bowel preparation by reducing intestinal gas content before abdominal radiography to visualize bile and pancreatic and renal stones. A type of charcoal biscuit has also been marketed as a pet care product.
Dentistry - Removal of amalgam fillings
Dentists who remove amalgam fillings using the Safe Mercury Amalgam Removal Technique (SMART) technique give the patient "a slurry of charcoal, chlorella, or similar adsorbent to rinse and swallow before the procedure (unless the patient declines or there are other contraindications making this clinically inappropriate)".
Other
Claims that activated charcoal will do things such as whiten teeth, cure alcohol-induced hangovers, and prevent bloating, are not supported by evidence. Activated charcoal cleanses also lack evidence and are considered pseudoscience.
Side effects
Incorrect application (e.g. into the lungs) results in pulmonary aspiration which can sometimes be fatal if immediate medical treatment is not initiated. The use of activated carbon is contraindicated when the ingested substance is an acid, an alkali, or a petroleum product.
Mechanism of action
Activated charcoal is biologically inert. When in the presence of some poisons, activated charcoal adsorbs the chemical onto its surface, rendering it unable to interact with the body. This is possible due to its high surface area compared to its volume.
History
The use of charcoal as a medicinal product can be traced back to Egypt in 1500 BC, where it was used to neutralise bad odours from wounds. By 400 BC, the Phoenicians used charcoal to improve the taste of water stored on ships by containing the water in charred barrels, indicating that an understanding of charcoal's ability to adsorb undesirable chemicals was present by this time. Activated charcoal in its current form was developed during the 18th century, first being used during the sugar refining process to remove coloured impurities from raw sugar. Medical use of activated charcoal commenced in the early 19th century; an often-cited experiment demonstrating its properties was carried out in 1835, where a dosage of strychnine mixed with activated charcoal resulted in no symptoms of poisoning being observed.

An adze () or adz is an ancient and versatile cutting tool similar to an axe but with the cutting edge perpendicular to the handle rather than parallel. Adzes have been used since the Stone Age. They are used for smoothing or carving wood in hand woodworking, and as a hoe for agriculture and horticulture. Two basic forms of an adze are the hand adze (short hoe)—a short-handled tool swung with one hand—and the foot adze (hoe)—a long-handled tool capable of powerful swings using both hands, the cutting edge usually striking at foot or shin level. A similar tool is called a mattock, which differs by having two blades, one perpendicular to the handle and one parallel.
History
Africa
The adze is depicted in ancient Egyptian art from the Old Kingdom onward. Originally the adze blades were made of stone, but already in the Predynastic Period copper adzes had all but replaced those made of flint. Stone blades were fastened to the handle by tying and early bronze blades continued this simple construction. It was not until the later Bronze Age that the handle passes through an eye at the top of the blade. Examples of Egyptian adzes can be found in museums and on the Petrie Museum website.
A depiction of an adze was also used as a hieroglyph, representing the consonants stp, "chosen", and used as: ...Pharaoh XX, chosen of God/Goddess YY...
The ahnetjer (Manuel de Codage transliteration: aH-nTr) depicted as an adze-like instrument, was used in the Opening of the Mouth ceremony, intended to convey power over their senses to statues and mummies. It was apparently the foreleg of a freshly sacrificed bull or cow with which the mouth was touched.
As Iron Age technology moved south into Africa with migrating ancient Egyptians, they carried their technology with them, including adzes. To this day, iron adzes are used all over rural Africa for various purposes—from digging pit latrines, and chopping firewood, to tilling crop fields—whether they are of maize (corn), coffee, tea, pyrethrum, beans, millet, yams, or a plethora of other cash and subsistence crops.
South Pacific
Prehistoric Māori adzes from New Zealand were for wood carving, typically made from pounamu sourced from the South Island. During the Māori Archaic period found on the North Island were commonly made from greywacke from Motutapu Island or basalt from Opito Bay in the Coromandel, similar to adzes constructed on other Pacific Islands. Early period notched adzes found in Northland were primarily made of argillite quarried from locations around the Marlborough and Nelson regions. At the same time on Henderson Island, a small coral island in eastern Polynesia lacking any rock other than limestone, native populations may have fashioned giant clamshells into adzes.
Northwest Coastal America
American Northwest coast native peoples traditionally used adzes for both functional construction (from bowls to canoes) and art (from masks to totem poles). Northwest coast adzes take two forms: hafted and D-handle. The hafted form is similar in form to a European adze with the haft constructed from a natural crooked branch which approximately forms a 60% angle. The thin end is used as the handle and the thick end is flattened and notched such that an adze iron can be lashed to it. Modern hafts are sometimes constructed from a sawed blank with a dowel added for strength at the crook. The second form is the D-handle adze which is basically an adze iron with a directly attached handle. The D-handle, therefore, provides no mechanical leverage. Northwest coast adzes are often classified by size and iron shape vs. role. As with European adzes, iron shapes include straight, gutter and lipped. Where larger Northwest adzes are similar in size to their European counterparts, the smaller sizes are typically much lighter such that they can be used for the detailed smoothing, shaping and surface texturing required for figure carving. Final surfacing is sometimes performed with a crooked knife.
New Guinea and Melanesia
Ground stone adzes used to be produced by a variety of people in Western New Guinea (Indonesia), Papua New Guinea and some of the smaller Islands of Melanesia and Micronesia. The hardstone would have been ground on a riverine rock with the help of water until the desired shape was obtained. It was then fixed to a natural grown angled wood with resin and plant fibers. A variety of minerals were used. Imported steel axes or machetes have now entirely replaced these tools for decades in even the remotest parts of New Guinea. Indeed, even before the first foreign missionaries or colonial officials arrived in the New Guinea Highlands, inhabitants had already obtained steel tools through trade with their neighbors. Stone tools are sometimes manufactured to be sold as curios to tourists.
Modern adzes
Modern adzes are made from steel with wooden handles, and enjoy limited use: occasionally in semi-industrial areas, but particularly by "revivalists" such as those at the Colonial Williamsburg cultural center in Virginia, United States. However, the traditional adze has largely been replaced by the sawmill and the powered plane, at least in industrialised cultures. It remains in use for some specialist crafts, for example by coopers. Adzes are also in current use by artists such as Northwest Coast American and Canadian Indigenous sculptors doing totem pole carving, as well as masks and bowls.
Foot adze
"Adzes are used for removing heavy waste, leveling, shaping, or trimming the surfaces of timber" and boards. Generally, the user stands astride a board or log and swings the adze downwards between his feet, chipping off pieces of wood, moving backwards as they go and leaving a relatively smooth surface behind.
Foot adzes are most commonly known as shipbuilder's or carpenter's adzes. They range in size from 00 to 5 being 3+1/4 to 4+3/4 pounds (1.5–2.2 kg) with the cutting edge 3 to 4+1/2 inches (75–115 mm) wide. On the modern, steel adze the cutting edge may be flat for smoothing work to very rounded for hollowing work such as bowls, gutters and canoes. The shoulders or sides of an adze may be curved called a lipped adze, used for notching. The end away from the cutting edge is called the pole and be of different shapes, generally flat or a pin pole.
Carpenter's adze – A heavy adze, often with very steep curves, and a very heavy, blunt pole. The weight of this adze makes it unsuitable for sustained overhead adzing.
Railroad adze – A carpenter's adze which had its bit extended in an effort to limit the breaking of handles when shaping railroad ties (railway sleepers). Early examples in New England began showing up approximately in the 1840s–1850s. The initial prototypes clearly showed a weld where the extension was attached.
Shipwright's adze – A lighter, and more versatile adze than the carpenter's adze. This was designed to be used in a variety of positions, including overhead, as well as in front on waist and chest level.
Lipped shipwright's adze – A variation of the shipwright's adze. It features a wider than normal bit, whose outside edges are sharply turned up, so that when gazing directly down the adze, from bit to eye, the cutting edge resembles an extremely wide and often very flat U. This adze was mainly used for shaping cross grain, such as for joining planks.
Another group of adzes can be differentiated by the handles; the D-handled adzes have a handle where the hand can be wrapped around the D, close to the bit. These adzes closely follow traditional forms in that the bit or tooth is not wrapped around the handle as a head.
The head of an ice axe typically possesses an adze for chopping rough steps in ice.
A firefighter tool called the Halligan bar has a dull adze on one end of the bar. This bar is a multipurpose tool for forcible entry of a structure and demolition with a forked pry-bar on one end and an adze and spike on the other, called the adze-end.
Demolition adze – A demolition adze has a dull edge and is used for separating materials in the demolition or salvage of old buildings.
Hand adze
There are a number of specialist, short-handled adzes used by coopers, wainwrights, and chair makers, and in bowl and trough making. Many of these have shorter handles for control and more curve in the head to allow better clearance for shorter cuts.
Bulgarian adze
During the communist period of Bulgaria, a new multi-use woodworking adze, called Теслà (Teslà), emerged. It has a sharpened edge perpendicular to the handle, resembling an adze, but it is also used like a carpenter's hammer. On the back of the head is a textured poll for driving nails, and on the front is a V-shaped hole used for prying, to extract the bent nails.
There is a popular Bulgarian folk song called "На теслата дръжката" (eng: The tesla's handle) about a craftsman and the masculinity of his tool.

An aerial saw is a saw which is flown through the air. The aerial saw may also be known as a helicopter aerial saw.
Large aerial saws are flown by helicopter to trim trees in remote locations when they overgrow power lines, pipelines or other infrastructure. A design used in the Appalachian region has ten circular saws on a twenty-foot shaft which is carried by an MD 500 helicopter, typically using a rigid boom of about 80 feet long on a gimbal mount, so that the saw can swing below the aircraft. The saw blades are powered by a 28-horsepower engine and the assembly weighs 830 pounds. This design is used to prune trees for customers such as American Electric Power. Another design, with a single, horizontal, 47-inch, circular saw blade, is used to cut the tops off trees which are at risk of falling across power lines.
Operation
The aerial saw is not used only to make new paths for transmission or power lines, but also for maintaining the paths initially cut by the aerial saws. The aerial saw is suspended from a helicopter able to support the swinging weight of the saw. Once the saw is attached to the helicopter, it is turned on and precisely piloted alongside potentially troublesome tree branches. Normally, more than one pass by the branches is needed to ensure adequate coverage. The branches are then picked up by a ground crew and disposed of properly.
Design
The design of the aerial saw is fairly simple. It involves ten two-foot diameter circular saw blades (normally seen in Table saws) mounted on a vertical shaft which is around twenty feet long. Those ten circular saw blades are driven by a 28 horsepower engine. The engine is able to run all ten blades at speeds up to four-thousand revolutions per minute (RPM). The shaft is then attached to a ninety-foot aluminum boom (or beam) then attached to the helicopter where the pilot can remotely control the saw.
Safety & Regulations
The aerial saw facilitates the quick removal of tree branches that are a potential hazard, but is itself inherently dangerous due to its construction and size. In order for one of these saws to be used in a residential area, a safety buffer must be in place prior to work. The operation must be monitored and certified by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and covered by insurance.
History
Prior to 1983, the side trimming of trees for electric utilities was done by climbing crews or workers armed with mechanical trimmers. In 1983 Randall Rogers of Pea Ridge Arkansas flew the first Helicopter Aerial Saw. Following Rogers' death, Aerial Solutions Inc. (ASI) purchased the Aerial Saw patent. They then pioneered the use of helicopters for side trimming of paths for more than 20 utility, pipeline companies, and governmental agencies throughout the United States. American Electric Power (AEP) began using the aerial saw to clear out paths for transmission lines in 1986. These transmission lines were first established in Virginia, West Virginia, Kentucky and Tennessee, where the terrain is known to be very mountainous and difficult to access with hand power tools.

Agglomerate is a material composed of iron oxides and gangue, roasted and sintered in an agglomeration plant. This product is obtained by burning coal previously mixed with iron ore and oxides. This conditioning of iron ore optimizes its use in the blast furnace.
History
The advantages of agglomeration were identified very early on, but the processes used at the time were not continuous. The primitive method, which consisted of a grindstone grate, was abandoned towards the end of the 19th century because it was too fuel-intensive. Shaft furnaces then replaced them, their much higher efficiency being due both to the confinement of the reaction and to counter-current operation (the solids sink and the gases rise).
In these furnaces, iron ores were roasted to obtain the opposite result to the one we're looking for now: in 1895, roasting was carried out at low temperatures to avoid aggregation, and to obtain friable ore.
At the time, ore roasting furnaces were tanks inspired by blast furnaces and lime kilns, and were not very productive tools. Around 1910, the Greenawald process, which automated the principle3, saw some development, enabling the production of 300,000 tonnes a year.
In June 1906, A.S. Dwight and R. L. Lloyd built the first agglomerating machine on a chain (also known as a grate), which began agglomerating copper and lead ores. The first agglomeration line for iron ores was built in 1910 in Birdsboro, Pennsylvania.
It took some thirty years for the sintering of ores on chains to become widespread in the steel industry. Whereas before the Second World War, it was mainly used for reconditioning ore fines, after 1945 it became widespread for processing raw ores. Today, it plays an essential role in the blending of different ores and, above all, in the incorporation of mineral wastes of varying iron content. This recycling role improves profitability and limits the amount of waste generated by steel complexes, which generate numerous iron-rich residues (slag, sludge, dust, etc.).
Interests and limitations
Interests
Chipboard is a product optimized for use in blast furnaces. To do so, it must meet several conditions:
be composed of a gangue of oxides which, combined with the ash from coke combustion (essentially silica), will give rise to a fusible slag which is both reactive towards impurities (in particular the sulfur provided by the coke), not very aggressive towards the refractories lining the blast furnace and of a quality suitable for its use;
Ensure a precise particle size, generally between 20 and 80 mm (pieces that are too small clog up the furnace, and pieces that are too large take too long to transform in the core);
maintain permeability to reducing gases at the highest possible temperatures;
low-temperature endothermic reactions that can be carried out more economically outside a blast furnace. These are essentially drying, calcination of the gangue (decarbonisation of limestone and dehydration of clay or gypsum), and reduction reactions. The agglomerate then becomes, at equal weight, richer in iron than the ore.
over oxidize iron oxides, Fe2O3 being better reduced by the carbon monoxide present in the blast furnace than less oxidized compounds, especially Fe3O4.
Another advantage is the elimination of undesirable elements: the chain agglomeration process eliminates 80-95% of the sulfur present in the ore and its additives. It's also a way of getting rid of zinc, the element that "poisons" blast furnaces, as its vaporization temperature of 907 °C corresponds to that of a well-conducted roast.
Limitations
On the other hand, agglomerate is an abrasive product that damages blast furnace vessels, especially if these are not designed for absorber, and is above all fragile. Repeated handling degrades its grain size and generates fines, making it unsuitable for packaging at sites far from blast furnaces: pellets are therefore preferable. Cold resistance, particularly to crushing, can be improved by increasing the energy input during sintering.
Improving mechanical strength also improves the performance of agglomerates in the processes that use them. The reduction of hematite (Fe2O3) to magnetite (Fe3O4) creates internal stresses. However, in addition to increasing the cost of agglomerate production, reducibility deteriorates when mechanical strength is sought.
Composition
Agglomerates are generally classified as acidic or basic. The complete basicity index ic is calculated by the following ratio of mass concentrations:
I
c
[
C
a
O
]
+
[
M
g
O
]
[
S
i
O
2
]
+
[
A
l
2
O
3
]
{\displaystyle I_{c}={\frac {[CaO]+[MgO]}{[SiO_{2}]+[Al_{2}O_{3}]}}}
It is often simplified by simply calculating a simplified basicity index noted i (or sometimes ia), equal to the ratio CaO / SiO2. An agglomerate with an index ic of less than 1 is said to be acidic; above 1, it is generally said to be basic; equal to 1, it is said to be self-melting (ic=1 being equivalent to ia=1.40). Before the 1950s, agglomerates with an ic value of less than 0.5 were in the majority. Then, when it was realized that agglomerate could incorporate limestone, which was then charged into the blast furnace separately, basic indices became widespread: in 1965, indices below 0.5 represented less than 15% of the tonnage of agglomerate produced, while basic agglomerates accounted for 45%.
Again, we find the relationship:
i
b
[
C
a
O
]
+
k
⋅
[
M
g
O
]
[
S
i
O
2
]
{\displaystyle \scriptstyle \ i_{b}={\frac {[CaO]+k\cdot [MgO]}{[SiO_{2}]}}}
k being an empirically determined constant (sometimes equal, for simplicity, to 1). Iron reduction is, in itself, favored by a basic environment, and peaks at 2<ib<2.5. It is also in this range that mechanical strength is best (and also, the slag's fusibility is the worst, which complicates its removal from the blast furnace). Above an ib value of 2.6, the proportion of molten agglomerate increases, clogging the pores and slowing down chemical reactions between gases and oxides. As for acid agglomerates with an ib index of less than 1, softening begins as soon as only around 15% of the ore has been reduced.
The optimum basicity index is therefore determined according to the ore used, the technical characteristics of the blast furnace, the intended use of the cast iron and the desired qualities. For example:
Cast irons made from Minette (ore) and intended for refining using the Thomas process had basicities of i=1.35 (a complete index I=1), which was a compromise between low-temperature viscosity (which requires an acidic slag) and desulfurization (favored by a basic slag);
plants for which sulfur-rich cast iron is not a problem adopt a more acidic agglomerate: with i= 0.9 to 1.0. This favors silicon reduction but can result in very high sulfur contents, from 0.1 to 0.25%;
the production of ferromanganese in the blast furnace requires a high manganese yield and therefore high basicities, up to i = 1.7 or 1.8 (bearing in mind that in this particular case, the index corresponds to
i
[
C
a
O
]
+
[
M
g
O
]
+
[
B
a
O
]
[
S
i
O
2
]
{\displaystyle \scriptstyle \ i={\frac {[CaO]+[MgO]+[BaO]}{[SiO_{2}]}}}
!). Meltability is a secondary consideration in this case, as slag temperatures can reach 1,650 °C (instead of 1,450 °C - 1,550 °C in the production of cast irons for refining).

In animal communication, an alarm signal is an antipredator adaptation in the form of signals emitted by social animals in response to danger. Many primates and birds have elaborate alarm calls for warning conspecifics of approaching predators. For example, the alarm call of the blackbird is a familiar sound in many gardens. Other animals, like fish and insects, may use non-auditory signals, such as chemical messages. Visual signs such as the white tail flashes of many deer have been suggested as alarm signals; they are less likely to be received by conspecifics, so have tended to be treated as a signal to the predator instead.
Different calls may be used for predators on the ground or from the air. Often, the animals can tell which member of the group is making the call, so that they can disregard those of little reliability.
Evidently, alarm signals promote survival by allowing the receivers of the alarm to escape from the source of peril; this can evolve by kin selection, assuming the receivers are related to the signaller. However, alarm calls can increase individual fitness, for example by informing the predator it has been detected.
Alarm calls are often high-frequency sounds because these sounds are harder to localize.
Selective advantage
This cost/benefit tradeoff of alarm calling behaviour has sparked many interest debates among evolutionary biologists seeking to explain the occurrence of such apparently "self-sacrificing" behaviour. The central question is this: "If the ultimate purpose of any animal behaviour is to maximize the chances that an organism's own genes are passed on, with maximum fruitfulness, to future generations, why would an individual deliberately risk destroying itself (their entire genome) for the sake of saving others (other genomes)?".
Altruism
Some scientists have used the evidence of alarm-calling behaviour to challenge the theory that "evolution works only/primarily at the level of the gene and of the gene's 'interest' in passing itself along to future generations." If alarm-calling is truly an example of altruism, then human understanding of natural selection becomes more complicated than simply "survival of the fittest gene".
Other researchers, generally those who support the selfish gene theory, question the authenticity of this "altruistic" behaviour. For instance, it has been observed that vervets sometimes emit calls in the presence of a predator, and sometimes do not. Studies show that these vervets may call more often when they are surrounded by their own offspring and by other relatives who share many of their genes. Other researchers have shown that some forms of alarm calling, for example, "aerial predator whistles" produced by Belding's ground squirrels, do not increase the chances that a caller will get eaten by a predator; the alarm call is advantageous to both caller and recipient by frightening and warding off the predator.
Predator-directed signaling
Another theory suggests that alarm signals function to attract further predators, which fight over the prey organism, giving it a better chance of escape. Others still suggest they are a deterrent to predators, communicating the prey's alertness to the predator. One such case is the western swamphen (Porphyrio porphyrio), which gives conspicuous visual tail flicks (see also aposematism, handicap principle and stotting).
Further research
Considerable research effort continues to be directed toward the purpose and ramifications of alarm-calling behaviour, because, to the extent that this research has the ability to comment on the occurrence or non-occurrence of altruistic behaviour, these findings can be applied to the understanding of altruism in human behaviour.
Monkeys with alarm calls
Vervet monkeys
Vervet monkeys (Chlorocebus Pygerythus) are some of the most studied monkeys when it comes to vocalization and alarm calls within the nonhuman primates. They are most known for making alarm calls in the presence of their most common predators (leopards, eagles, and snakes). Alarm calls of the vervet monkey are considered arbitrary in relation to the predator that they signify, in the sense that while the calls may be distinct to the threat that the monkeys are perceiving, the calls do not mimic the actual sounds of the predator – it is like yelling "Danger!" when seeing an angry dog rather than making barking sounds. This type of alarm calls is seen as the earliest example of symbolic communication (the relationship between signifier and signified is arbitrary and purely conventional) in nonhuman primates.
However, there is much debate on whether the vervet monkeys alarm calls are actual "words" in the sense of purposely manipulating sounds to communicate specific meaning or are unintentional sounds that are made when interacting with an outside stimulus. Like small children who cannot communicate words effectively make random noises when being played with or are stimulated by something in their immediate environment. As children grow and begin learning how to communicate, the noises they make are very broad in relation to their environment. They begin to recognize the things in their environment but there more things than known words or noises so a certain sound may reference multiple things. As children get older, they can become more specific about the noises and words made in relation to the things in their environment. It is thought that as Vervet monkeys get older they are able to learn and break the broad categories into more specific sub categories to a specific context.
In an experiment conducted by Dr. Tabitha Price, they used custom software to gather the acoustic sounds of male and female Vervet monkeys from East Africa and male Vervet monkey from South Africa. The point of the experiment was to gather the acoustic sounds of these monkeys when stimulated by the presence of snakes (mainly Python), raptors, terrestrial animals (mostly Leopards), and aggression. Then to determine if the calls could be distinguished with a known context.
The experiment determined that while the Vervet monkeys were able to categorize different predators and members of different social groups, however their ability to communicate specific threats is not proven. The chirps and barks that Vervet monkeys make as an eagle swoops in are the same chirps and barks that are made in moments of high arousal. Similarly, the barks made for leopards are the same that are made during aggressive interactions. The environment that they exist in is too complex for their ability to communicate about everything in their environment specifically.
In an experiment conducted by Dr. Julia Fischer, a drone was flown over Vervet monkeys and recorded the sounds produced. The Vervet monkeys made alarm calls that were almost identical to the eagle calls of East African Vervets. When a sound recording of the drone was played back a few days later to a monkey that was alone and away from the main group it looked up and scanned the sky. Dr. Fischer concluded that Vervet monkeys can be exposed to a new threat once and understand what it means.
It is still debated whether or not Vervet monkeys are actually aware of what the alarm calls mean. One side of the argument is that the monkeys give alarm calls because they are simply excited. The other side of the argument is that the alarm calls create mental representation of predators in the listeners minds. The common middle ground argument is that they give alarm calls because they want others to elicit a certain response, not necessarily because they want the group to think that there is a specific threat near.
Ultimately there is not enough evidence to support whether or not the calls are simply identifying a threat or calling for specific action due to the threat.
Campbell's mona monkeys
Campbell's mona monkeys also generate alarm calls, but in a different way than vervet monkeys. Instead of having discrete calls for each predator, Campbell monkeys have two distinct types of calls which contain different calls which consist in an acoustic continuum of affixes which change meaning. It has been suggested that this is a homology to human morphology. Similarly, the cotton-top tamarin is able to use a limited vocal range of alarm calls to distinguish between aerial and land predators. Both the Campbell monkey and the cotton-top tamarin have demonstrated abilities similar to vervet monkeys' ability to distinguish likely direction of predation and appropriate responses.
That these three species use vocalizations to warn others of danger has been called by some proof of proto-language in primates. However, there is some evidence that this behavior does not refer to the predators themselves but to threat, distinguishing calls from words.
Barbary macaque
Another species that exhibits alarm calls is the Barbary macaque. Barbary macaque mothers are able to recognize their own offspring's calls and behave accordingly.
Diana monkeys
Diana monkeys also produce alarm signals. Adult males respond to each other's calls, showing that calling can be contagious. Their calls differ based on signaller sex, threat type, habitat, and caller ontogenetic or lifetime predator experience.
Diana monkeys emit different alarm calls as a result of their sex. Male alarm calls are primarily used for resource defence, male–male competition, and communication between groups of conspecifics. Female alarm calls are mainly used for communication within groups of conspecifics to avoid predation.
Alarm calls are also predator-specific. In Taï National Park, Côte d'Ivoire, Diana monkeys are preyed on by leopards, eagles, and chimpanzees, but only emit alarm calls for leopards and eagles. When threatened by chimpanzees, they use silent, cryptic behaviour and when threatened by leopards or eagles, they emit predator-specific alarm signals. When researchers play recordings of alarm calls produced by chimpanzees in response to predation by leopards, about fifty per cent of nearby Diana monkeys switch from a chimpanzee antipredator response to a leopard antipredator response. The tendency to switch responses is especially prominent among Diana monkey populations that live within the main range of the chimpanzee community. This shift in antipredator response suggests that the monkeys interpret chimpanzee-produced, leopard-induced alarm calls as evidence for the presence of a leopard. When the same monkeys are then played recordings of leopard growls, their reactions confirm that they had anticipated the presence of a leopard. There are three possible cognitive mechanisms explaining how Diana monkeys recognize chimpanzee-produced, leopard-induced alarm calls as evidence for a nearby leopard: associative learning, causal reasoning, or a specialized learning programme driven by adaptive antipredator behaviour necessary for survival.
In Taï National Park and Tiwai Island, Sierra Leone, specific acoustic markers in the alarm calls of Diana monkeys convey both threat type and caller familiarity information to a receiver. In Taï National Park, males respond to eagle alarm signals based on predator type and caller familiarity. When the caller is unfamiliar to the receiver, the response call is a 'standard' eagle alarm call, characterized by a lack of frequency transition at the onset of the call. When the caller is familiar, the response call is an atypical eagle alarm call, characterized by a frequency transition at onset, and the response is faster than to that of an unfamiliar caller. On Tiwai Island, males respond in the opposite way to eagle alarm signals. When the caller is familiar, the response call is a 'standard' eagle alarm call, without a frequency transition at onset. When the caller is unfamiliar, the response call is an atypical eagle alarm call, with a frequency transition at onset.
The differences in alarm call responses are due to differences in habitat. In Taï National Park, there is a low predation risk from eagles, high primate abundance, strong intergroup competition, and a tendency for group encounters to result in high levels of aggression. Therefore, even familiar males are a threat to whom males respond with aggression and an atypical eagle alarm call. Only unfamiliar males, who are likely to be solitary and non-threatening, do not receive an aggressive response and receive only a typical alarm call. On Tiwai Island, there is a high predation risk from eagles, low primate abundance, a tendency for group encounters to result in peaceful retreats, low resource competition, and frequent sharing of foraging areas. Therefore, there is a lack of aggression towards familiar conspecifics to whom receivers respond with a 'standard' eagle call. There is only aggression towards unfamiliar conspecifics, to whom receivers respond with an atypical call. Simply put, a response with a typical eagle alarm call prioritizes the risk of predation, while a response with an atypical alarm call prioritizes social aggression.
Diana monkeys also display a predisposition for flexibility in acoustic variation of alarm call assembly related to caller ontogenetic or lifetime predator experience. In Taï National Park and on Tiwai Island, monkeys have a predisposition to threat-specific alarm signals. In Taï National Park, males produce three threat-specific calls in response to three threats: eagles, leopards, and general disturbances. On Tiwai Island, males produce two threat-specific calls in response to two groups of threats: eagles, and leopards or general disturbances. The latter are likely grouped together because leopards have not been present on the island for at least 30 years.
Other primates, such as Guereza monkeys and putty-nosed monkeys, also have two main predator-specific assemblies of alarm calls. Predator-specific alarm signals differ based on call sequence assembly. General disturbances in Taï National Park and both general disturbances and leopards on Tiwai Island result in alarm calls assembled into long sequences. Conversely, leopards in Taï National Park result in alarm calls that typically begin with voiced inhalations followed by a small number of calls. These differences in alarm call arrangement between habitats are due to ontogenetic experience; specifically, a lack of experience with leopards on Tiwai Island causes them to be classified in the same predator category as general disturbances, and accordingly, leopards receive the same type of alarm call arrangement.
Sexual selection for predator-specific alarm signals
In guenons, selection is responsible for the evolution of predator-specific alarm calls from loud calls. Loud calls travel long distances, greater than that of the home range, and can be used as beneficial alarm calls to warn conspecifics or showcase their awareness of and deter a predator. A spectrogram of a subadult male call shows that the call is a composition of elements from a female alarm call and male loud call, suggesting the transition from the latter to the former during puberty and suggesting that alarm calls gave rise to loud calls through sexual selection. Evidence of sexual selection in loud calls includes structural adaptations for long-range communication, co-incidence of loud calls and sexual maturity, and sexual dimorphism in loud calls.
Controversy over the semantic properties of alarm calls
Not all scholars of animal communication accept the interpretation of alarm signals in monkeys as having semantic properties or transmitting "information". Prominent spokespersons for this opposing view are Michael Owren and Drew Rendall, whose work on this topic has been widely cited and debated. The alternative to the semantic interpretation of monkey alarm signals as suggested in the cited works is that animal communication is primarily a matter of influence rather than information, and that vocal alarm signals are essentially emotional expressions influencing the animals that hear them. In this view monkeys do not designate predators by naming them, but may react with different degrees of vocal alarm depending on the nature of the predator and its nearness on detection, as well as by producing different types of vocalization under the influence of the monkey's state and movement during the different types of escape required by different predators. Other monkeys may learn to use these emotional cues along with the escape behaviour of the alarm signaller to help make a good decision about the best escape route for themselves, without there having been any naming of predators.
Chimpanzees with alarm calls
Chimpanzees emit alarm calls in response to predators, such as leopards and snakes. They produce three types of alarm calls: acoustically-variable 'hoos', 'barks', and 'SOS screams'. Alarm signalling is impacted by receiver knowledge and caller age, can be coupled with receiver monitoring, and is important to the understanding of the evolution of hominoid communication.
Receiver knowledge
Alarm signalling varies depending on the receiver's knowledge of a certain threat. Chimpanzees are significantly more likely to produce an alarm call when conspecifics are unaware of a potential threat or were not nearby when a previous alarm call was emitted. When judging if conspecifics are unaware of potential dangers, chimpanzees do not solely look for behavioural cues, but also assess receiver mental states and use this information to target signalling and monitoring. In a recent experiment, caller chimpanzees were shown a fake snake as a predator and were played pre-recorded calls from receivers. Some receivers emitted calls that were snake-related, and therefore represented receivers with knowledge of the predator, while other receivers emitted calls that were not snake-related, and therefore represented receivers without knowledge of the predator. In response to the non-snake-related calls from receivers, the signallers increased their vocal and nonvocal signalling and coupled it with increased receiver monitoring.
Caller age
Chimpanzee age impacts the frequency of alarm signalling. Chimpanzees over 80 months of age are more likely to produce an alarm call than those less than 80 months of age. There are several hypotheses for this lack of alarm calling in infants zero to four years of age. The first hypothesis is a lack of motivation to produce alarm calls because of mothers in close proximity that minimize the infant's perception of a threat or that respond to a threat before the infant can. Infants may also be more likely to use distress calls to catch their mother's attention in order for her to produce an alarm call. Infants might also lack the physical ability to produce alarm calls or lack the necessary experience to classify unfamiliar objects as dangerous and worthy of an alarm signal. Therefore, alarm calling may require advanced levels of development, perception, categorization, and social cognition.
Other factors
Other factors, such as signaller arousal, receiver identity, or increased risk of predation from calling, do not have a significant effect on the frequency of alarm call production.
Receiver monitoring
However, while alarm signals can be coupled with receiver monitoring, there is a lack of consensus on the definition, starting age, and purpose of monitoring. It is either defined as the use of three subsequent gaze alternations, from a threat to a nearby conspecific and back to the threat, or as the use of two gaze alternations. Moreover, while some studies only report gaze alternation as starting in late juveniles, other studies report gaze alternation in infants as early as five months of age. In infants and juveniles, it is potentially a means of social referencing or social learning through which younger chimpanzees check the reactions of more experienced conspecifics in order to learn about new situations, such as potential threats. It has also been proposed to be a communicative behaviour or simply the result of shifts in attention between different environmental elements.
Evolution of hominoid communication
The evolution of hominoid communication is evident through chimpanzee 'hoo' vocalizations and alarm calls. Researchers propose that communication evolved as natural selection diversified 'hoo' vocalizations into context-dependent 'hoos' for travel, rest, and threats. Context-dependent communication is beneficial and likely maintained by selection as it facilities cooperative activities and social cohesion between signallers and receivers that can increase the likelihood of survival. Alarm calls in chimpanzees also point to the evolution of hominoid language. Callers assess conspecifics' knowledge of threats, fill their need for information, and, in doing so, use social cues and intentionality to inform communication. Filling a gap in information and incorporating social cues and intentionality into communication are all components of human language. These shared elements between chimpanzee and human communication suggest an evolutionary basis, most likely that the last common human ancestor with chimpanzees also possessed these linguistic abilities.
False alarm calls
Deceptive alarm calls are used by male swallows (Hirundo rustica). Males give these false alarm calls when females leave the nest area during the mating season, and are thus able to disrupt extra-pair copulations. As this is likely to be costly to females, it can be seen as an example of sexual conflict.
Counterfeit alarm calls are also used by thrushes to avoid intraspecific competition. By sounding a bogus alarm call normally used to warn of aerial predators, they can frighten other birds away, allowing them to eat undisturbed.
Vervets seem to be able to understand the referent of alarm calls instead of merely the acoustic properties, and if another species' specific alarm call (terrestrial or aerial predator, for instance) is used incorrectly with too high of a regularity, the vervet will learn to ignore the analogous vervet call as well.
Alarm pheromones
Alarm signals need not be communicated only by auditory means. For example, many animals may use chemosensory alarm signals, communicated by chemicals known as pheromones. Minnows and catfish release alarm pheromones (Schreckstoff) when injured, which cause nearby fish to hide in dense schools near the bottom. At least two species of freshwater fish produce chemicals known as disturbance cues, which initiates a coordinated antipredator defence by increasing group cohesion in response to fish predators. Chemical communication about threats is also known among plants, though it is debated to what extent this function has been reinforced by actual selection. Lima beans release volatile chemical signals that are received by nearby plants of the same species when infested with spider mites. This 'message' allows the recipients to prepare themselves by activating defense genes, making them less vulnerable to attack, and also attracting another mite species that is a predator of spider mites (indirect defence). Although it is conceivable that other plants are only intercepting a message primarily functioning to attract "bodyguards", some plants spread this signal on to others themselves, suggesting an indirect benefit from increased inclusive fitness.
Deceptive chemical alarm signals are also employed. For example, the wild potato, Solanum berthaultii, emits the aphid alarm-pheromone, (E)-β-farnesene, from its leaves, which functions as a repellent against the green peach aphid, Myzus persicae.

At atmospheric pressure, three allotropic forms of iron exist, depending on temperature: alpha iron (α-Fe, ferrite), gamma iron (γ-Fe, austenite), and delta iron (δ-Fe, similar to alpha iron). At very high pressure, a fourth form exists, epsilon iron (ε-Fe, hexaferrum). Some controversial experimental evidence suggests the existence of a fifth high-pressure form that is stable at very high pressures and temperatures.
The phases of iron at atmospheric pressure are important because of the differences in solubility of carbon, forming different types of steel. The high-pressure phases of iron are important as models for the solid parts of planetary cores. The inner core of the Earth is generally assumed to consist essentially of a crystalline iron-nickel alloy with ε structure. The outer core surrounding the solid inner core is believed to be composed of liquid iron mixed with nickel and trace amounts of lighter elements.
Standard pressure allotropes
Alpha iron (α-Fe)
Below 912 °C (1,674 °F), iron has a body-centered cubic (bcc) crystal structure and is known as α-iron or ferrite. It is thermodynamically stable and a fairly soft metal. α-Fe can be subjected to pressures up to ca. 15 GPa before transforming into a high-pressure form termed ε-Fe, discussed below.
Magnetically, α-iron is paramagnetic at high temperatures. However, below its Curie temperature (TC or A2) of 771 °C (1044K or 1420 °F), it becomes ferromagnetic. In the past, the paramagnetic form of α-iron was known as beta iron (β-Fe). Even though the slight tetragonal distortion in the ferromagnetic state does constitute a true phase transition, the continuous nature of this transition results in only minor importance in steel heat treating. The A2 line forms the boundary between the beta iron and alpha fields in the phase diagram in Figure 1.
Similarly, the A2 boundary is of only minor importance compared to the A1 (eutectoid), A3 and Acm critical temperatures. The Acm, where austenite is in equilibrium with cementite + γ-Fe, is beyond the right edge in Fig. 1. The α + γ phase field is, technically, the β + γ field above the A2. The beta designation maintains continuity of the Greek-letter progression of phases in iron and steel: α-Fe, β-Fe, austenite (γ-Fe), high-temperature δ-Fe, and high-pressure hexaferrum (ε-Fe).
The primary phase of low-carbon or mild steel and most cast irons at room temperature is ferromagnetic α-Fe. It has a hardness of approximately 80 Brinell. The maximum solubility of carbon is about 0.02 wt% at 727 °C (1,341 °F) and 0.001% at 0 °C (32 °F). When it dissolves in iron, carbon atoms occupy interstitial "holes". Being about twice the diameter of the tetrahedral hole, the carbon introduces a strong local strain field.
Mild steel (carbon steel with up to about 0.2 wt% C) consists mostly of α-Fe and increasing amounts of cementite (Fe3C, an iron carbide). The mixture adopts a lamellar structure called pearlite. Since bainite and pearlite each contain α-Fe as a component, any iron-carbon alloy will contain some amount of α-Fe if it is allowed to reach equilibrium at room temperature. The amount of α-Fe depends on the cooling process.
A2 critical temperature and induction heating
β-Fe and the A2 critical temperature are important in induction heating of steel, such as for surface-hardening heat treatments. Steel is typically austenitized at 900–1000 °C before it is quenched and tempered. The high-frequency alternating magnetic field of induction heating heats the steel by two mechanisms below the Curie temperature: resistance or Joule heating and ferromagnetic hysteresis losses. Above the A2 boundary, the hysteresis mechanism disappears and the required amount of energy per degree of temperature increase is thus substantially larger than below A2. Load-matching circuits may be needed to vary the impedance in the induction power source to compensate for the change.
Gamma iron (γ-Fe)
When heating iron above 912 °C (1,674 °F), its crystal structure changes to a face-centered cubic (fcc) crystalline structure. In this form it is called gamma iron (γ-Fe) or austenite. γ-iron can dissolve considerably more carbon (as much as 2.04% by mass at 1,146 °C). This γ form of carbon saturation is exhibited in austenitic stainless steel.
Delta iron (δ-Fe)
Peculiarly, above 1,394 °C (2,541 °F), iron changes back into the bcc structure, known as δ-Fe. δ-iron can dissolve as much as 0.08% of carbon by mass at 1,475 °C. It is stable up to its melting point of 1,538 °C (2,800 °F). δ-Fe cannot exist above 5.2 GPa, with austenite instead transitioning directly to a molten phase at these high pressures.
High pressure allotropes
Epsilon iron / Hexaferrum (ε-Fe)
At pressures above approximately 10–13 GPa and temperatures up to around 700 K, α-iron changes into a hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure, which is also known as ε-iron or hexaferrum; the higher-temperature γ-phase also changes into ε-iron, but generally requires far higher pressures as temperature increases. The triple point of hexaferrum, ferrite, and austenite is 10.5 GPa at 750 K. Antiferromagnetism in alloys of epsilon-Fe with Mn, Os and Ru has been observed.
Experimental high temperature and pressure
An alternate stable form, if it exists, may appear at pressures of at least 50 GPa and temperatures of at least 1,500 K; it has been thought to have an orthorhombic or a double hcp structure. As of December 2011, recent and ongoing experiments are being conducted on high-pressure and superdense carbon allotropes.
Phase transitions
Melting and boiling points
The melting point of iron is experimentally well defined for pressures less than 50 GPa.
For greater pressures, published data (as of 2007) put the γ-ε-liquid triple point at pressures that differ by tens of gigapascals and 1000 K in the melting point. Generally speaking, molecular dynamics computer simulations of iron melting and shock wave experiments suggest higher melting points and a much steeper slope of the melting curve than static experiments carried out in diamond anvil cells.
The melting and boiling points of iron, along with its enthalpy of atomization, are lower than those of the earlier group 3d elements from scandium to chromium, showing the lessened contribution of the 3d electrons to metallic bonding as they are attracted more and more into the inert core by the nucleus; however, they are higher than the values for the previous element manganese because that element has a half-filled 3d subshell and consequently its d-electrons are not easily delocalized. This same trend appears for ruthenium but not osmium.
Structural phase transitions
The exact temperatures at which iron will transition from one crystal structure to another depends on how much and what type of other elements are dissolved in the iron. The phase boundary between the different solid phases is drawn on a binary phase diagram, usually plotted as temperature versus percent iron. Adding some elements, such as Chromium, narrows the temperature range for the gamma phase, while others increase the temperature range of the gamma phase. In elements that reduce the gamma phase range, the alpha-gamma phase boundary connects with the gamma-delta phase boundary, forming what is usually called the Gamma loop. Adding Gamma loop additives keeps the iron in a body-centered cubic structure and prevents the steel from suffering phase transition to other solid states.

An alloy is a mixture of chemical elements of which in most cases at least one is a metallic element, although it is also sometimes used for mixtures of elements; herein only metallic alloys are described. Metallic alloys often have properties that differ from those of the pure elements from which they are made. The vast majority of metals used for commercial purposes are alloyed to improve their properties or behavior, such as increased strength, hardness or corrosion resistance. Metals may also be alloyed to reduce their overall cost, for instance alloys of gold and copper.
In an alloy, the atoms are joined by metallic bonding rather than by covalent bonds typically found in chemical compounds. The alloy constituents are usually measured by mass percentage for practical applications, and in atomic fraction for basic science studies. Alloys are usually classified as substitutional or interstitial alloys, depending on the atomic arrangement that forms the alloy. They can be further classified as homogeneous (consisting of a single phase), or heterogeneous (consisting of two or more phases) or intermetallic. An alloy may be a solid solution of metal elements (a single phase, where all metallic grains (crystals) are of the same composition) or a mixture of metallic phases (two or more solutions, forming a microstructure of different crystals within the metal).
Examples of alloys include red gold (gold and copper), white gold (gold and silver), sterling silver (silver and copper), steel or silicon steel (iron with non-metallic carbon or silicon respectively), solder, brass, pewter, duralumin, bronze, and amalgams. Alloys are used in a wide variety of applications, from the steel alloys used in everything from buildings to automobiles to surgical tools, to exotic titanium alloys used in the aerospace industry, to beryllium-copper alloys for non-sparking tools.
Characteristics
An alloy is a mixture of chemical elements which forms an impure substance (admixture) that retains the characteristics of a metal. Alloys are made by mixing two or more elements, at least one of which is a metal. This is usually called the primary metal or the base metal, and the name of this metal may also be the name of the alloy. The other constituents may or may not be metals but, when mixed with the molten base, they will be soluble and dissolve into the mixture.
The mechanical properties of alloys will often be quite different from those of its individual constituents. A metal that is normally very soft (malleable), such as aluminium, can be altered by alloying it with another soft metal, such as copper. Although both metals are very soft and ductile, the resulting aluminium–copper alloy will have much greater strength. Adding a small amount of non-metallic carbon to iron trades its great ductility for the greater strength of an alloy called steel. Due to its very-high strength, but still substantial toughness, and its ability to be greatly altered by heat treatment, steel is one of the most useful and common alloys in modern use. By adding chromium to steel, its resistance to corrosion can be enhanced, creating stainless steel, while adding silicon will alter its electrical characteristics, producing silicon steel.
Like oil and water, a molten metal may not always be miscible with another element. For example, lithium, magnesium, or silver are almost completely insoluble with pure iron. Even when the constituents are soluble, each will usually have a saturation point, beyond which no more of the constituent can be added. Iron, for example, can stably hold a maximum of 6.67% carbon, forming a compound called cementite.
Although the elements of an alloy usually must be soluble in the liquid state, they may not always be soluble in the solid state. If the metals remain soluble when solid, the alloy forms a solid solution, becoming a homogeneous structure consisting of identical crystals, called a phase. If as the mixture cools the constituents become insoluble, they may separate to form two or more different types of crystals, creating a heterogeneous microstructure of different phases, some with more of one constituent than the other. However, in other alloys, the insoluble elements may not separate until after crystallization occurs. If cooled very quickly, they first crystallize as a homogeneous phase, but they are supersaturated with the secondary constituents. As time passes, the atoms of these supersaturated alloys can separate from the crystal lattice, becoming more stable, and forming a second phase that serves to reinforce the crystals internally.
Some alloys, such as electrum—an alloy of silver and gold—occur naturally. Meteorites are sometimes made of naturally occurring alloys of iron and nickel, but are not native to the Earth. One of the first alloys made by humans was bronze, which is a mixture of the metals tin and copper. Bronze was an extremely useful alloy to the ancients, because it is much stronger and harder than either of its components. Steel was another common alloy. However, in ancient times, it could only be created as an accidental byproduct from the heating of iron ore in fires (smelting) during the manufacture of iron. Other ancient alloys include pewter, brass, and pig iron.
In the modern age, steel can be created in many forms. Carbon steel can be made by varying only the carbon content, producing soft alloys like mild steel or hard alloys like spring steel. Alloy steels can be made by adding other elements, such as chromium, molybdenum, vanadium, or nickel, resulting in alloys such as high-speed steel or tool steel. Small amounts of manganese are usually alloyed with most modern steels because of its ability to remove unwanted impurities, like phosphorus, sulfur, and oxygen, which can have detrimental effects on the alloy. However, most alloys were not created until the 1900s, such as various aluminium, titanium, nickel, and magnesium alloys. Some modern superalloys, such as incoloy, inconel, and hastelloy, may consist of a multitude of different elements.
An alloy is technically an impure metal, but when referring to alloys, the term impurities usually denotes undesirable elements. Such impurities are introduced from the base metals and alloying elements, but are removed during processing. For instance, sulfur is a common impurity in steel. Sulfur combines readily with iron to form iron sulfide, which is very brittle, creating weak spots in the steel. Lithium, sodium and calcium are common impurities in aluminium alloys, which can have adverse effects on the structural integrity of castings. Conversely, otherwise pure-metals that contain unwanted impurities are often called "impure metals" and are not usually referred to as alloys. Impure metals such as cast iron or wrought iron are less controlled, but are often considered useful.
Oxygen, present in the air, readily combines with most metals to form metal oxides, especially at higher temperatures encountered during alloying. Depending on the alloy, this can eventually result in a failure of the component being produced. Great care is often taken during the alloying process to remove excess impurities, using fluxes, chemical additives, or other methods of extractive metallurgy.
Theory
Alloying a metal is done by combining it with one or more other elements. The most common and oldest alloying process is performed by heating the base metal beyond its melting point and then dissolving the solutes into the molten liquid, which may be possible even if the melting point of the solute is far greater than that of the base. For example, in its liquid state, titanium is a very strong solvent capable of dissolving most metals and elements. In addition, it readily absorbs gases like oxygen and burns in the presence of nitrogen. This increases the chance of contamination from any contacting surface, and so must be melted in vacuum induction-heating and special, water-cooled, copper crucibles.
Carbon has a very high melting-point and only does so under high atmospheric pressure, so it was impossible for ancient civilizations to combine with iron as a liquid solute. However, alloying (in particular, interstitial alloying) may be performed with one or more constituents in a gaseous state, such as found in a blast furnace to make pig iron (liquid-gas), nitriding, carbonitriding or other forms of case hardening (solid-gas), or the cementation process used to make blister steel (solid-gas). It may also be done with one, more, or all of the constituents in the solid state, such as found in ancient methods of pattern welding (solid-solid), shear steel (solid-solid), or crucible steel production (solid-liquid), mixing the elements via solid-state diffusion.
By adding another element to a metal, differences in the size of the atoms create internal stresses in the lattice of the metallic crystals; stresses that often enhance its properties. For example, the combination of carbon with wrought iron produces steel, which is stronger than iron, its primary element. The electrical and thermal conductivity of alloys is usually lower than that of the pure metals. The physical properties, such as density, reactivity, Young's modulus of an alloy may not differ greatly from those of its base element, but engineering properties such as tensile strength, ductility, and shear strength may be substantially different from those of the constituent materials. This is sometimes a result of the sizes of the atoms in the alloy, because larger atoms exert a compressive force on neighboring atoms, and smaller atoms exert a tensile force on their neighbors, helping the alloy resist deformation. Sometimes alloys may exhibit marked differences in behavior even when small amounts of one element are present. For example, impurities in semiconducting ferromagnetic alloys lead to different properties, as first predicted by White, Hogan, Suhl, Tian Abrie and Nakamura.
Unlike pure metals, most alloys do not have a single melting point, but a melting range during which the material is a mixture of solid and liquid phases (a slush). The temperature at which melting begins is called the solidus, and the temperature when melting is just complete is called the liquidus. For many alloys there is a particular alloy proportion (in some cases more than one), called either a eutectic mixture or a peritectic composition, which gives the alloy a unique and low melting point, and no liquid/solid slush transition.
Heat treatment
Alloying elements are added to a base metal, to induce hardness, toughness, ductility, or other desired properties. Many metals and alloys can be work hardened by creating defects in their crystal structure. These defects are created during plastic deformation by hammering, bending, extruding, et cetera, and are permanent unless the metal is recrystallized. Otherwise, some alloys can also have their properties altered by heat treatment. Nearly all metals can be softened by annealing, which recrystallizes the alloy and repairs the defects, but not as many can be hardened by controlled heating and cooling. Many alloys of aluminium, copper, magnesium, titanium, and nickel can be strengthened to some degree by some method of heat treatment, but few respond to this to the same degree as does steel.
The base metal iron of the iron-carbon alloy known as steel, undergoes a change in the arrangement (allotropy) of the atoms of its crystal matrix at a certain temperature (usually 820 °C (1,500 °F) or more, depending on carbon content). This allows the smaller carbon atoms to enter the interstices of the iron crystal. When this diffusion happens, the carbon atoms are said to be in solution in the iron, forming a particular single, homogeneous, crystalline phase called austenite. If the steel is cooled slowly, the carbon can diffuse out of the iron and it will gradually revert to its low temperature allotrope. During slow cooling, the carbon atoms will no longer be as soluble with the iron, and will be forced to precipitate out of solution, nucleating into a more concentrated form of iron carbide (Fe3C) in the spaces between the pure iron crystals. The steel then becomes heterogeneous, as it is formed of two phases, the iron-carbon phase called cementite (or carbide), and pure iron ferrite. Such a heat treatment produces a steel that is rather soft. If the steel is cooled quickly, however, the carbon atoms will not have time to diffuse and precipitate out as carbide, but will be trapped within the iron crystals. When rapidly cooled, a diffusionless (martensite) transformation occurs, in which the carbon atoms become trapped in solution. This causes the iron crystals to deform as the crystal structure tries to change to its low temperature state, leaving those crystals very hard but much less ductile (more brittle).
While the high strength of steel results when diffusion and precipitation is prevented (forming martensite), most heat-treatable alloys are precipitation hardening alloys, that depend on the diffusion of alloying elements to achieve their strength. When heated to form a solution and then cooled quickly, these alloys become much softer than normal, during the diffusionless transformation, but then harden as they age. The solutes in these alloys will precipitate over time, forming intermetallic phases, which are difficult to discern from the base metal. Unlike steel, in which the solid solution separates into different crystal phases (carbide and ferrite), precipitation hardening alloys form different phases within the same crystal. These intermetallic alloys appear homogeneous in crystal structure, but tend to behave heterogeneously, becoming hard and somewhat brittle.
In 1906, precipitation hardening alloys were discovered by Alfred Wilm. Precipitation hardening alloys, such as certain alloys of aluminium, titanium, and copper, are heat-treatable alloys that soften when quenched (cooled quickly), and then harden over time. Wilm had been searching for a way to harden aluminium alloys for use in machine-gun cartridge cases. Knowing that aluminium-copper alloys were heat-treatable to some degree, Wilm tried quenching a ternary alloy of aluminium, copper, and the addition of magnesium, but was initially disappointed with the results. However, when Wilm retested it the next day he discovered that the alloy increased in hardness when left to age at room temperature, and far exceeded his expectations. Although an explanation for the phenomenon was not provided until 1919, duralumin was one of the first "age hardening" alloys used, becoming the primary building material for the first Zeppelins, and was soon followed by many others. Because they often exhibit a combination of high strength and low weight, these alloys became widely used in many forms of industry, including the construction of modern aircraft.
Mechanisms
When a molten metal is mixed with another substance, there are two mechanisms that can cause an alloy to form, called atom exchange and the interstitial mechanism. The relative size of each element in the mix plays a primary role in determining which mechanism will occur. When the atoms are relatively similar in size, the atom exchange method usually happens, where some of the atoms composing the metallic crystals are substituted with atoms of the other constituent. This is called a substitutional alloy. Examples of substitutional alloys include bronze and brass, in which some of the copper atoms are substituted with either tin or zinc atoms respectively.
In the case of the interstitial mechanism, one atom is usually much smaller than the other and can not successfully substitute for the other type of atom in the crystals of the base metal. Instead, the smaller atoms become trapped in the interstitial sites between the atoms of the crystal matrix. This is referred to as an interstitial alloy. Steel is an example of an interstitial alloy, because the very small carbon atoms fit into interstices of the iron matrix.
Stainless steel is an example of a combination of interstitial and substitutional alloys, because the carbon atoms fit into the interstices, but some of the iron atoms are substituted by nickel and chromium atoms.
History and examples
Meteoric iron
The use of alloys by humans started with the use of meteoric iron, a naturally occurring alloy of nickel and iron. It is the main constituent of iron meteorites. As no metallurgic processes were used to separate iron from nickel, the alloy was used as it was. Meteoric iron could be forged from a red heat to make objects such as tools, weapons, and nails. In many cultures it was shaped by cold hammering into knives and arrowheads. They were often used as anvils. Meteoric iron was very rare and valuable, and difficult for ancient people to work.
Bronze and brass
Iron is usually found as iron ore on Earth, except for one deposit of native iron in Greenland, which was used by the Inuit. Native copper, however, was found worldwide, along with silver, gold, and platinum, which were also used to make tools, jewelry, and other objects since Neolithic times. Copper was the hardest of these metals, and the most widely distributed. It became one of the most important metals to the ancients. Starting around 10,000 years ago in the highlands of Anatolia (Turkey), humans learned to smelt metals such as copper and tin from ore. Early bronze alloys used copper and arsenic, but the latter can be toxic to the metal-workers. Around 2500 BC, people began alloying tin and copper to form bronze, which was much harder than its ingredients. However, tin was rare, being found mostly in Great Britain.
In the Middle East, people began alloying copper with zinc to form brass. Ancient civilizations took into account the mixture and the various properties it produced, such as hardness, toughness and melting point, under various conditions of temperature and work hardening, developing much of the information contained in modern alloy phase diagrams. For example, arrowheads from the Chinese Qin dynasty (around 200 BC) were often constructed with a hard bronze-head, but a softer bronze-tang, combining the alloys to prevent both dulling and breaking during use.
Amalgams
Mercury has been smelted from cinnabar for thousands of years. Mercury dissolves many metals, such as gold, silver, and tin, to form amalgams (an alloy in a soft paste or liquid form at ambient temperature). Amalgams have been used since 200 BC in China for gilding objects such as armor and mirrors with precious metals. The ancient Romans often used mercury-tin amalgams for gilding their armor. The amalgam was applied as a paste and then heated until the mercury vaporized, leaving the gold, silver, or tin behind. Mercury was often used in mining, to extract precious metals like gold and silver from their ores.
Precious metals
Many ancient civilizations alloyed metals for purely aesthetic purposes. In ancient Egypt and Mycenae, gold was often alloyed with copper to produce red-gold, or iron to produce a bright burgundy-gold. Gold was often found alloyed with silver or other metals to produce various types of colored gold. These metals were also used to strengthen each other, for more practical purposes. Copper was often added to silver to make sterling silver, increasing its strength for use in dishes, silverware, and other practical items.
Quite often, precious metals were alloyed with less valuable substances as a means to deceive buyers. Around 250 BC, Archimedes was commissioned by the King of Syracuse to find a way to check the purity of the gold in a crown, leading to the famous bath-house shouting of "Eureka!" upon the discovery of Archimedes' principle.
Pewter
The term pewter covers a variety of alloys consisting primarily of tin. As a pure metal, tin is much too soft to use for most practical purposes. However, during the Bronze Age, tin was a rare metal in many parts of Europe and the Mediterranean, so it was often valued higher than gold. To make jewellery, cutlery, or other objects from tin, workers usually alloyed it with other metals to increase strength and hardness. These metals were typically lead, antimony, bismuth or copper. These solutes were sometimes added individually in varying amounts, or added together, making a wide variety of objects, ranging from practical items such as dishes, surgical tools, candlesticks or funnels, to decorative items like ear rings and hair clips.
The earliest examples of pewter come from ancient Egypt, around 1450 BC. The use of pewter was widespread across Europe, from France to Norway and Britain (where most of the ancient tin was mined) to the Near East. The alloy was also used in China and the Far East, arriving in Japan around 800 AD, where it was used for making objects like ceremonial vessels, tea canisters, or chalices used in shinto shrines.
Iron
The first known smelting of iron began in Anatolia, around 1800 BC. Called the bloomery process, it produced very soft but ductile wrought iron. By 800 BC, iron-making technology had spread to Europe, arriving in Japan around 700 AD. Pig iron, a very hard but brittle alloy of iron and carbon, was being produced in China as early as 1200 BC, but did not arrive in Europe until the Middle Ages. Pig iron has a lower melting point than iron, and was used for making cast iron. However, these metals found little practical use until the introduction of crucible steel around 300 BC.
These steels were of poor quality, and the introduction of pattern welding, around the 1st century AD, sought to balance the extreme properties of the alloys by laminating them, to create a tougher metal. Around 700 AD, the Japanese began folding bloomery-steel and cast iron in alternating layers to increase the strength of their swords, using clay fluxes to remove slag and impurities. This method of Japanese swordsmithing produced one of the purest steel-alloys of the ancient world.
While the use of iron started to become more widespread around 1200 BC, mainly because of interruptions in the trade routes for tin, the metal was much softer than bronze. However, very small amounts of steel, (an alloy of iron and around 1% carbon), was always a byproduct of the bloomery process. The ability to modify the hardness of steel by heat treatment had been known since 1100 BC, and the rare material was valued for the manufacture of tools and weapons.
Because the ancients could not produce temperatures high enough to melt iron fully, the production of steel in decent quantities did not occur until the introduction of blister steel during the Middle Ages. This method introduced carbon by heating wrought iron in charcoal for long periods of time, but the absorption of carbon in this manner is extremely slow thus the penetration was not very deep, so the alloy was not homogeneous. In 1740, Benjamin Huntsman began melting blister steel in a crucible to even out the carbon content, creating the first process for the mass production of tool steel. Huntsman's process was used for manufacturing tool steel until the early 1900s.
The introduction of the blast furnace to Europe in the Middle Ages meant that people could produce pig iron in much higher volumes than wrought iron. Because pig iron could be melted, people began to develop processes to reduce carbon in liquid pig iron to create steel. Puddling had been used in China since the first century, and was introduced in Europe during the 1700s, where molten pig iron was stirred while exposed to the air, to remove the carbon by oxidation. In 1858, Henry Bessemer developed a process of steel-making by blowing hot air through liquid pig iron to reduce the carbon content. The Bessemer process led to the first large scale manufacture of steel.
Steel is an alloy of iron and carbon, but the term alloy steel usually only refers to steels that contain other elements— like vanadium, molybdenum, or cobalt—in amounts sufficient to alter the properties of the base steel. Since ancient times, when steel was used primarily for tools and weapons, the methods of producing and working the metal were often closely guarded secrets. Even long after the Age of Enlightenment, the steel industry was very competitive and manufacturers went through great lengths to keep their processes confidential, resisting any attempts to scientifically analyze the material for fear it would reveal their methods. For example, the people of Sheffield, a center of steel production in England, were known to routinely bar visitors and tourists from entering town to deter industrial espionage. Thus, almost no metallurgical information existed about steel until 1860. Because of this lack of understanding, steel was not generally considered an alloy until the decades between 1930 and 1970 (primarily due to the work of scientists like William Chandler Roberts-Austen, Adolf Martens, and Edgar Bain), so "alloy steel" became the popular term for ternary and quaternary steel-alloys.
After Benjamin Huntsman developed his crucible steel in 1740, he began experimenting with the addition of elements like manganese (in the form of a high-manganese pig-iron called spiegeleisen), which helped remove impurities such as phosphorus and oxygen; a process adopted by Bessemer and still used in modern steels (albeit in concentrations low enough to still be considered carbon steel). Afterward, many people began experimenting with various alloys of steel without much success. However, in 1882, Robert Hadfield, being a pioneer in steel metallurgy, took an interest and produced a steel alloy containing around 12% manganese. Called mangalloy, it exhibited extreme hardness and toughness, becoming the first commercially viable alloy-steel. Afterward, he created silicon steel, launching the search for other possible alloys of steel.
Robert Forester Mushet found that by adding tungsten to steel it could produce a very hard edge that would resist losing its hardness at high temperatures. "R. Mushet's special steel" (RMS) became the first high-speed steel. Mushet's steel was quickly replaced by tungsten carbide steel, developed by Taylor and White in 1900, in which they doubled the tungsten content and added small amounts of chromium and vanadium, producing a superior steel for use in lathes and machining tools. In 1903, the Wright brothers used a chromium-nickel steel to make the crankshaft for their airplane engine, while in 1908 Henry Ford began using vanadium steels for parts like crankshafts and valves in his Model T Ford, due to their higher strength and resistance to high temperatures. In 1912, the Krupp Ironworks in Germany developed a rust-resistant steel by adding 21% chromium and 7% nickel, producing the first stainless steel.
A typical example of a modern alloy is 304 grade stainless steel which is commonly used for kitchen utensils, pans, knives and forks. Sometime also known as 18/8, it as an alloy consisting broadly of 74% iron, 18% chromium and 8% nickel. The chromium and nickel alloying elements add strength and hardness to the majority iron element, but their main function is to make it resistant to rust/corrosion.
Others
Due to their high reactivity, most metals were not discovered until the 19th century. A method for extracting aluminium from bauxite was proposed by Humphry Davy in 1807, using an electric arc. Although his attempts were unsuccessful, by 1855 the first sales of pure aluminium reached the market. However, as extractive metallurgy was still in its infancy, most aluminium extraction-processes produced unintended alloys contaminated with other elements found in the ore; the most abundant of which was copper. These aluminium-copper alloys (at the time termed "aluminium bronze") preceded pure aluminium, offering greater strength and hardness over the soft, pure metal, and to a slight degree were found to be heat treatable. However, due to their softness and limited hardenability these alloys found little practical use, and were more of a novelty, until the Wright brothers used an aluminium alloy to construct the first airplane engine in 1903. During the time between 1865 and 1910, processes for extracting many other metals were discovered, such as chromium, vanadium, tungsten, iridium, cobalt, and molybdenum, and various alloys were developed.
Prior to 1910, research mainly consisted of private individuals tinkering in their own laboratories. However, as the aircraft and automotive industries began growing, research into alloys became an industrial effort in the years following 1910, as new magnesium alloys were developed for pistons and wheels in cars, and pot metal for levers and knobs, and aluminium alloys developed for airframes and aircraft skins were put into use. The Doehler Die Casting Co. of Toledo, Ohio were known for the production of Brastil, a high tensile corrosion resistant bronze alloy.
Industry
As a part of industrial procurement for the production of precision alloys, intermediate good 'master alloy' ingots or powder are produced with a consistent mixture of desired metal content. These master alloys can then be combined to produce the final desired alloy for production. In the aluminium alloy industry, master alloy is commonly introduced to aluminium to adjust the metal grain of the final alloy.

Alpha Sigma Mu (ΑΣΜ) is an international scholastic honor society recognizing academic achievement among students in the fields of metallurgy and materials engineering. It was established in 1932 at Michigan Technological University.
History
Alpha Sigma Mu was founded by the Metallurgy Department of the Michigan College of Mining and Technology (now Michigan Technological University) in January 1932. It was established as a scholastic honor society to recognize academic achievement of students of metallurgy, metallurgical engineering, and materials engineering.
After expanding to three campuses, it maintained these three chapters without further growth. In 1957, the society was reorganized with the assistance of the American Society for Metals. Alpha Sigma Mu was admitted to the Association of College Honor Societies in 1965.
It separated from the American Society for Metals in the 1990s. In the 21st century, it expanded internationally, with chapters installed in Australia, India, Russia, and Spain.
In 2012, the society had 34 active chapters, 150 active members, and a total membership of over 8,000. Its headquarters are housed at Michigan Technological University in Houghton, Michigan.
Symbols
The Alpha Sigma Mu badge is a rectangular gold or silver key engraved with a C-curve and the Greek letters ΑΣΜ. The society's colors are silver and gold. Its symbol is the C-curve. Its publication is ASM Blog.
Membership
Alpha Sigma Mu has three classes of membership: regular (student), honorary, and distinguished life members. Potential student members are nominated by the chapters' faculty advisors. Initiates are juniors and seniors ranked in the top 25 percent of the department, with and a GPA in the top fifty percent. Graduate students are also eligible for membership.
Chapters
Following is list of Alpha Sigma Mu chapters.
Notable members
Y. Austin Chang, material engineering researcher and professor emeritus at the University of Wisconsin–Madison
Anthony G. Evans, professor of materials and mechanical engineering at the University of California, Santa Barbara
Mukta Farooq, metallurgical engineer for IBM
Julie Schoenung, materials scientist who is a professor at the University of California, Irvine

In metallurgy, alpha case is the oxygen-enriched surface phase that occurs when titanium and its alloys are exposed to heated air or oxygen. Alpha case is hard and brittle, and tends to create a series of microcracks that will reduce the metal's performance and its fatigue properties. Alpha case can be minimized or avoided by processing titanium at very deep vacuum levels. However once present on the surface, the currently applied method to remove the alpha case is by the subtractive methods of machining and/or chemical milling.
An emerging technique is to subject the metal to an electrochemical treatment in molten salts, such as calcium chloride or lithium chloride at elevated temperatures. This method removes the dissolved oxygen from the alpha case, hence restoring the oxygen-free metal. However, an unwanted consequence of the high temperature treatment is the growth of the grains in the metal. Grain growth may be limited by lowering the molten salt temperature. Alternatively, the metal may be rolling-pressed again to break the large grains into smaller ones.

The Altars for Peace are a series of wooden tables conceived by George Nakashima. Several altars have been placed around the world, beginning with one in the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in 1986. Others are located in Russia, India, and South Africa.
Background and conceptualization
George Nakashima (1905–1990) was a pioneering American woodworker and designer described as "America's most important contemporary woodworker" in a 2020 Architectural Digest article. In the 1980s he was deemed "the dean of the world's woodworkers." He studied architecture in college and later learned Japanese carpentry styles in the 1930s before being interned in the 1940s, where he continued to study carpentry. Nakashima started selling furniture in 1945, a company that grew to have wide appeal. Nakashima reportedly believed trees had souls and sought to find their "living spirit," according to a profile in The New York Times.
Nakashima came up with the concept of creating "Altars for Peace" around 1983 upon discovering a walnut tree that was about three hundred years old from a logger. To him, the tree was a "once in a lifetime tree". It had taken a week to cut down and The New York Times reported just one type of saw could cut it. Nakashima reported that he wanted the peace movement to have "something tangible, a sort of symbol, something you can put your hands on,'' and felt that the tree deserved "special meaning and special use." The idea reportedly came from a dream in 1983 after Nakashima underwent surgery that had threatened his life. Right after having the dream, he began planning.
The first Altar for Peace was slowly shaped from the walnut tree. Nakashima had it brought to North Carolina, where a mill concluded nothing held on the eastern coast of the US could adequately cut the tree. He then brought the tree to Philadelphia and had Scott Wineland, a friend from California with expertise in cutting trees, fly a chainsaw mill in. The two and others began cutting the tree on January 16, 1984, at the Thompson Mahogany Company. It took a week to cut the trunk and the process was almost derailed when a concrete pipe that an arborist had put in the tree was hit. The wood then had to be dried for two years.
In 1985 Nakashima was informed about a 12-ton dying Northern California black walnut tree discovered near Sandy Gulch, California. He flew out to aid in cutting the tree up. He envisioned building a table where people would sit at and discuss peace. He told The Chico Enterprise-Record in 1985 that "If the wood in their [diplomat's] tables is false, their discussions begin falsely as well." Nakashima and his supporters in the effort were divided over how many altars to build—some proposed two, one that would go in the United Nations Secretariat Building in New York and another to Hiroshima, while others suggested five spread across continents. Nakashima also proposed an altar in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Construction, dedication, and later efforts
Nakashima constructed his altar at the George Nakashima House, Studio and Workshop in Bucks County, Pennsylvania. He combined two slabs of wood. When completed it weighed 3/4 of a ton, in approximately a triangle about 3 inches (76 mm) thick and 14 feet (4.3 m) by 12 feet (3.7 m). Nakashima estimated that it had cost him $10,000. He initially sought to put it in the UN, envisioning a place where it could "belong to everyone" and be "dedicated to the divine and peace". This effort was unsuccessful, and Nakashima turned to his friend Steven Clark Rockefeller, who put him in touch with James Parks Morton of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine. The two worked to select a location in the cathedral and it was scheduled to be dedicated during a Concert for Peace on New Year's Eve 1986. An estimated 5,000 people were present at the dedication. Nakashima sought to build more altars in the future and funds to aid in the effort were raised by a group led by Steven Clark Rockefeller. The Altar for Peace Foundation was created to further efforts.
After Nakashima's death in 1990, his daughter Mira Nakashima continued efforts to place altars around the world. The next one was completed and delivered to Russia, where it was called a Peace Table and approved for placement in the Russian Academy of Sciences in February 1992. The altar was supposed to be dedicated on September 2, 1992. However, in 2013 it was on display in the Russian Academy of Arts. By that year altars had been placed in Russia, New York, India (in Auroville, dedicated 1996), and a fourth was set to be placed in the Desmond Tutu Peace Centre in Cape Town, South Africa.

An inclusion is a solid particle in liquid aluminium alloy. It is usually non-metallic and can be of different nature depending on its source.
Problems related to inclusions
Inclusions can create problems in the casting when they are large and in too high concentration. Here are examples of problems related to inclusions:
Pinholes in light gauge foil
Flange cracks in beverage containers
Surface streaks in bright automotive trim and lithographic material
Breakage in wire drawing operation
Increased tool wear and tear
Increased porosity
Loss of pressure tightness of engine blocks
Poor machinability
Cosmetic defect in apparent surfaces
Diminished mechanical properties (e.g. Ultimate Tensile Strength, Yield Strength, Elongation)
Inclusion types
Oxide films
In contact with ambient air, liquid aluminium reacts with the oxygen and form an oxide film layer (gamma-Al2O3). This layer becomes thicker with time. When molten aluminium is disturbed, this oxide film gets mixed inside the melt.
Aluminium carbide
In primary aluminium production, aluminium carbides (Al4C3) originates from the reduction of alumina where carbon anodes and cathodes are in contact with the mix. Later in the process, any carbon tools in contact with the liquid aluminium can react and create carbides.
Magnesium oxides
In aluminium alloys containing magnesium, magnesium oxides (MgO), cuboids (MgAl2O4-cuboid) and metallurgical spinel (MgAl2O4-spinel) can form. They result from the reaction between magnesium and oxygen in the melt. More of them will form with time and temperature.
Spinel can be highly detrimental because of its big size and high hardness.
Refractory materials
Particles of refractory material in contact with aluminium can detach and become inclusions. We can find graphite inclusions (C), alumina inclusions (alpha-Al2O3), CaO, SiO2, …
After some time, graphite refractory in contact with aluminium will react to create aluminum carbides (harder and more detrimental inclusions).
In aluminium alloy containing magnesium, the magnesium reacts with some refractories to create rather big and hard inclusions similar to spinels.
Unreacted refractory particles can originate from the degradation of refractory materials which comes in contact with the melt.
Chlorides
Chloride inclusions (MgCl2, NaCl, CaCl2, …) are a special type of inclusion as they are liquid in liquid metal. When aluminium solidifies, they form spherical voids similar to hydrogen gas porosity but the void contains a chloride crystal formed when aluminium became colder.
Fluxing salt
Fluxing salt, like chlorides are also liquid inclusions. They come from flux treatments added to the melt for cleaning.
Intentionally added inclusions
Titanium boride (TiB2) is intentionally added to the melt for grain refinement to improve mechanical properties.
Phosphorus is added to the melt hypereutectic alloys for modification of the silicon phase for better mechanical properties. This creates AlP inclusions.
Boron treatment inclusions ( (Ti, V)B2 ) form when boron is added to the melt to increase conductivity by precipitating vanadium and titanium.
Less frequently found inclusions
The following inclusion types can also be found in aluminium alloys: alumina needles (Al2O3), nitrides (AlN), iron oxides (FeO), manganese oxides (MnO), fluorides (Na3AlF6, NaF, CaF2, …), aluminium borides (AlB2, AlB12), borocarbides (Al4C4B).
Bone ash (Ca3(PO4)2) sometimes added to patch cracks in the trough can be found as inclusions in the melt.
Inclusion measurement
Several methods exist to measure the inclusion content in liquid aluminium. The most common methods are PoDFA, Prefil, K-Mold and LiMCA. Measuring the inclusions is of great help to understand the impact of furnace preparation, alloying practice, feedstock mix, settling time, and similar parameters on melt cleanliness.
PoDFA
The PoDFA method provides information on the composition and concentration of the inclusions in molten aluminum. PoDFA is widely used for process characterization and optimization, as well as product improvement. It allows to quickly and accurately assess the effects of various operating practices on metal cleanliness or identify filtration efficiency.
The PoDFA method was developed by Rio Tinto Alcan in the 70s. The metallographic analysis method has been optimized for over the years on a wide variety of alloys.
The measurement principle is the following: A predetermined quantity of liquid aluminum is filtered under controlled conditions using a very fine porosity filter. Inclusions in the melt are concentrated at the filter surface by a factor of about 10,000. The filter, along with the residual metal, is then cut, mounted and polished before being analyzed under an optical microscope by a trained PoDFA metallographer.
Prefil
The Prefil method is similar to PoDFA but, in addition to the metallographic analysis, Prefil provides also an immediate feedback on metal cleanliness from the metal flowrate through the filter. Because everything about the filtration is well controlled (pressure, metal temperature, ...), the only parameter affecting the filtration speed is the inclusion content. One can determine the cleanliness level from the filtration curve (weight of metal filtered as a function of time).
K-Mold
K-Mold is a fracture test method. Liquid metal is cast into a mold containing notches. Once solidified, the resulting bar is bent to expose a fracture surface. The visual observation of inclusions on the fracture is used to determine a K-value for the melt and compared to a preset standard. This method is rather imprecise and therefore only suitable when metal contains large inclusions and inclusion clusters.
LiMCA
The LiMCA method measures the total concentration and size distribution of inclusions present in aluminum alloys. Its measuring principle is based on an objective and user-independent method. The LiMCA CM system can characterize the cleanliness of a melt at time intervals in the order of one minute. It can therefore monitor, in real-time, the evolution of cleanliness along a cast as a function of process parameters and melt-handling practices.
The heart of the LiMCA measuring system consists of a closed glass tube (electrically insulating material) bearing a small orifice at its bottom. The tube is positioned in liquid metal. By creating a vacuum inside the tube, the metal with the suspended inclusions to be detected is forced through the small orifice. Two electrodes are necessary: one inside the tube and the other outside. Both electrodes are immersed in the liquid metal. A constant electric current is applied between the electrodes. The current flows through the
liquid metal by the small orifice in the tube. When an inclusion enters the orifice, it displaces its volume of conducting fluid, temporarily raising the electrical resistance. The increase of resistance generates a voltage pulse. The magnitude of the voltage pulse is a function of the volume of the particle. The duration of the pulse is related to the
transit time of the inclusion. The voltage pulses are amplified and their amplitude measured digitally. The size distribution and total concentration are displayed in real-time on a computer screen.
Inclusion removal
In order to get a good quality product, removing the inclusion becomes necessary. Liquid metal filtration through a ceramic medium is an efficient way to clean the metal. Different types of ceramic media are used in-line in foundries, such as ceramic foam filters, porous tube filters, bonded ceramic filters, and deep bed filters.

Aluminothermic reactions are exothermic chemical reactions using aluminium as the reducing agent at high temperature. The process is industrially useful for production of alloys of iron. The most prominent example is the thermite reaction between iron oxides and aluminium to produce iron itself:
Fe2O3 + 2 Al → 2 Fe + Al2O3
This specific reaction is however not relevant to the most important application of aluminothermic reactions, the production of ferroalloys. For the production of iron, a cheaper reducing agent, coke, is used instead via the carbothermic reaction.
History
Aluminothermy started from the experiments of Russian scientist Nikolay Beketov at the University of Kharkiv in Ukraine, who proved that aluminium restored metals from their oxides under high temperatures. The reaction was first used for the carbon-free reduction of metal oxides. The reaction is highly exothermic, but it has a high activation energy since strong interatomic bonds in the solids must be broken first. The oxide was heated with aluminium in a crucible in a furnace. The runaway reaction made it possible to produce only small quantities of material. Hans Goldschmidt improved the aluminothermic process between 1893 and 1898, by igniting the mixture of fine metal oxide and aluminium powder by a starter reaction without heating the mixture externally. The process was patented in 1898 and used extensively in the later years for rail track welding.
Applications
The aluminothermic reaction is used for the production of several ferroalloys, for example ferroniobium from niobium pentoxide and ferrovanadium from iron, vanadium(V) oxide, and aluminium. The process begins with the reduction of the oxide by the aluminium:
3 V2O5 + 10 Al → 5 Al2O3 + 6 V
Other metals can be produced from their oxides in the same way.
Aluminothermic reactions have been used for welding rail tracks on-site, useful for complex installations or local repairs that cannot be done using continuously welded rail. Another common use is the welding of copper cables (wire) for use in direct burial (grounding/earthing) applications. It is still the only type of electrical connection recognized by the IEEE (IEEE, Std 80–2001) as continuous un-spliced cable.

Amanzi Springs is a series of hydrothermal springs in the Eastern Cape Province of South Africa that have yielded a series of stratified Acheulian artefacts. It is one of only two archaeological sites in Africa, along with Kalambo Falls, that has yielded wood in association with early stone age artefacts (Deacon, 1970). Amanzi Springs is located about 40 kilometres (25 mi) north of Port Elizabeth and 18 kilometres (11 mi) from the coast.
One of the spring eyes (Area 1) was first excavated by Ray Inskeep in 1963. This excavation was then extended and deepened by Hilary Deacon in 1964–66, who also excavated at a second spring eye at the site (Area 2). These excavations establishing thick, stratified Acheulean deposits in both spring eyes, something extremely rare in southern African contexts. The archaeology from these spring eyes are considered to represent late occurrences of the Acheulian, or perhaps even a rare occurrence in South Africa of Sangoan artefacts (Herries, 2011). Despite this fact the site has not been investigated in 50 years. In 2015 a joint research project involving La Trobe University, the University of Johannesburg, and University of Cape Town began at the site and has noted the first occurrence of Middle Stone Age artefacts at the site (Figure 3).

An amorphous brazing foil (ABF) is a form of eutectic amorphous metal that serves as a filler metal in brazing operations. ABFs are composed of various transition metals (including nickel, iron, and copper) blended with metalloids like silicon, boron, and phosphorus. By precisely managing the concentration of these metalloids to achieve or approach the eutectic point, these alloys can undergo rapid solidification to form a ductile, amorphous foil. This process allows the ABF to effectively bond materials in the brazing process, providing a strong and seamless joint.
Production
The production of an amorphous metal can be achieved by cooling the liquid alloy too rapidly to allow a crystal structure to form. Melt spinning, a traditional method, produces a 0.5–125 mm wide strip with a thickness of 20–50 μm. Cutting, stamping, etching, or other methods can transform the cooled metal into parts or preforms.
Properties
A key characteristic of ABFs is their relatively low melting points, which typically range from 830 to 1200 °C. This attribute is crucial for their application as filler metals in brazing. Due to their ductility and flexibility, ABFs present a viable alternative to filler metals in paste or powder form. This substitution offers notable advantages, such as the elimination of soot formation, a common drawback associated with residual organic solvents in paste-based fillers. Additionally, ABFs help minimize the formation of surface oxides, an issue frequently encountered with gas-atomized powder fillers, thereby enhancing the quality and integrity of the brazed joint.
Usage
Amorphous brazing foils are used for brazing, a metallurgical process by which two pieces of metal are joined by melting and cooling a third "filler metal" between them. The use of preforms increases the capability of ABFs for use on an industrial scale, aiding machine assembly.

An amorphous metal (also known as metallic glass, glassy metal, or shiny metal) is a solid metallic material, usually an alloy, with disordered atomic-scale structure. Most metals are crystalline in their solid state, which means they have a highly ordered arrangement of atoms. Amorphous metals are non-crystalline, and have a glass-like structure. But unlike common glasses, such as window glass, which are typically electrical insulators, amorphous metals have good electrical conductivity and can show metallic luster.
Amorphous metals can be produced in several ways, including extremely rapid cooling, physical vapor deposition, solid-state reaction, ion irradiation, and mechanical alloying. Small batches of amorphous metals have been produced through a variety of quick-cooling methods, such as amorphous metal ribbons produced by sputtering molten metal onto a spinning metal disk (melt spinning). The rapid cooling (millions of degrees Celsius per second) comes too fast for crystals to form and the material is "locked" in a glassy state. Alloys with cooling rates low enough to allow formation of amorphous structure in thick layers (i.e., over 1 millimetre or 0.039 inches) have been produced and are known as bulk metallic glasses. Batches of amorphous steel with three times the strength of conventional steel alloys have been produced. New techniques such as 3D printing, also characterised by high cooling rates, are an active research topic.
History
The first reported metallic glass was Au75Si25, produced at Caltech by Klement, Willens, and Duwez in 1960. This and other early glass-forming alloys had to be rapidly cooled (on the order of one megakelvin per second, 106 K/s) to avoid crystallization. An important consequence of this was that metallic glasses could be produced in a few forms (typically ribbons, foils, or wires) in which one dimension was small so that heat could be extracted quickly enough to achieve the required cooling rate. As a result, metallic glass specimens (with a few exceptions) were limited to thicknesses of less than one hundred microns.
In 1969, an alloy of 77.5% palladium, 6% copper, and 16.5% silicon was found to have critical cooling rate between 100 and 1000 K/s.
In 1976, Liebermann and Graham developed a method of manufacturing thin ribbons of amorphous metal on a supercooled fast-spinning wheel. This was an alloy of iron, nickel, and boron. The material, known as Metglas, was commercialized in the early 1980s and became used for low-loss power distribution transformers (amorphous metal transformer). Metglas-2605 is composed of 80% iron and 20% boron, has a Curie temperature of 646 K (373 °C; 703 °F) and a room temperature saturation magnetization of 1.56 teslas.
In the early 1980s, glassy ingots with a diameter of 5 mm (0.20 in) were produced with an alloy of 55% palladium, 22.5% lead, and 22.5% antimony, by surface etching followed with heating-cooling cycles. Using boron oxide flux, the achievable thickness increased to one centimeter.
In 1982, a study on amorphous metal structural relaxation indicated a relationship between the specific heat and temperature of (Fe0.5Ni0.5)83P17. As the material was heated, the two properties displayed a negative relationship starting at 375 K, due to the change in relaxed amorphous states. When the material was annealed for periods from 1 to 48 hours, the properties instead displayed a positive relationship starting at 475 K for all annealing periods, since the annealing induced structure disappears at that temperature. In this study, amorphous alloys demonstrated glass transition and a super cooled liquid region. Between 1988 and 1992, more studies found more glass-type alloys with glass transition and a super cooled liquid region. From those studies, bulk glass alloys were made of La, Mg, and Zr, and these alloys demonstrated plasticity even with ribbon thickness from 20 μm to 50 μm. The plasticity was a stark difference to past amorphous metals that became brittle at those thicknesses.
In 1988, alloys of lanthanum, aluminium, and copper ore were revealed to be glass-forming. Al-based metallic glasses containing scandium exhibited a record-type tensile mechanical strength of about 1,500 MPa (220 ksi).
Bulk amorphous alloys of several millimeters in thickness were rare, although Pd-based amorphous alloys had been formed into rods with a 2 mm (0.079 in) diameter by quenching, and spheres with a 10 mm (0.39 in) diameter were formed by repetition flux melting with B2O3 and quenching.
New techniques were found in 1990, producing alloys that form glasses at cooling rates as low as one kelvin per second. These cooling rates can be achieved by simple casting into metallic molds. These alloys can be cast into parts several centimeters thick while retaining an amorphous structure. The best glass-forming alloys were based on zirconium and palladium, but alloys based on iron, titanium, copper, magnesium, and other metals are known. The process exploited a phenomenon called "confusion". Such alloys contain many elements (often four or more) such that upon cooling sufficiently quickly, constituent atoms cannot achieve an equilibrium crystalline state before their mobility is lost. In this way, the random disordered state of the atoms is "locked in".
In 1992, the commercial amorphous alloy, Vitreloy 1 (41.2% Zr, 13.8% Ti, 12.5% Cu, 10% Ni, and 22.5% Be), was developed at Caltech, as a part of Department of Energy and NASA research of new aerospace materials.
By 2000, research in Tohoku University and Caltech yielded multicomponent alloys based on lanthanum, magnesium, zirconium, palladium, iron, copper, and titanium, with critical cooling rate between 1 K/s and 100 K/s, comparable to oxide glasses.
In 2004, bulk amorphous steel was successfully produced by a groups at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which refers to their product as "glassy steel", and another at University of Virginia, named "DARVA-Glass 101". The product is non-magnetic at room temperature and significantly stronger than conventional steel.
In 2018, a team at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and Northwestern University reported the use of artificial intelligence to predict and evaluate samples of 20,000 different likely metallic glass alloys in a year.
Properties
Amorphous metal is usually an alloy rather than a pure metal. The alloys contain atoms of significantly different sizes, leading to low free volume (and therefore up to orders of magnitude higher viscosity than other metals and alloys) in molten state. The viscosity prevents the atoms from moving enough to form an ordered lattice. The material displays low shrinkage during cooling, and resistance to plastic deformation. The absence of grain boundaries, the weak spots of crystalline materials, leads to better wear resistance and less corrosion. Amorphous metals, while technically glasses, are much tougher and less brittle than oxide glasses and ceramics. Amorphous metals are either non-ferromagnetic, if they are composed of Ln, Mg, Zr, Ti, Pd, Ca, Cu, Pt and Au, or ferromagnetic, if they are composed of Fe, Co, and Ni.
Thermal conductivity is lower than in crystalline metals. As formation of amorphous structure relies on fast cooling, this limits the thickness of amorphous structures. To form amorphous structure despite slower cooling, the alloy has to be made of three or more components, leading to complex crystal units with higher potential energy and lower odds of formation. The atomic radius of the components has to be significantly different (over 12%), to achieve high packing density and low free volume. The combination of components should have negative mixing heat, inhibiting crystal nucleation and prolonging the time the molten metal stays in supercooled state.
As temperatures change, the electrical resistivity of amorphous metals behaves very different than that of regular metals. While resistivity in crystalline metals generally increases with temperature, following Matthiessen's rule, resistivity in many amorphous metals decreases with increasing temperature. This effect can be observed in amorphous metals of high resistivities between 150 and 300 microohm-centimeters. In these metals, the scattering events causing the resistivity of the metal are not statistically independent, thus explaining the breakdown of Matthiessen's rule. The fact that the thermal change of the resistivity in amorphous metals can be negative over a large range of temperatures and correlated to their absolute resistivity values was identified by Mooij in 1973, becoming Mooijs-rule.
Alloys of boron, silicon, phosphorus, and other glass formers with magnetic metals (iron, cobalt, nickel) have high magnetic susceptibility, with low coercivity and high electrical resistance. Usually the electrical conductivity of a metallic glass is of the same low order of magnitude as of a molten metal just above the melting point. The high resistance leads to low losses by eddy currents when subjected to alternating magnetic fields, a property useful for e.g. transformer magnetic cores. Their low coercivity also contributes to low loss.
Buckel and Hilsch discovered the superconductivity of amorphous metal thin films experimentally in the early 1950s. For certain metallic elements the superconducting critical temperature Tc can be higher in the amorphous state (e.g. upon alloying) than in the crystalline state, and in several cases Tc increases upon increasing the structural disorder. This behavior can be explained by the effect of structural disorder on electron-phonon coupling.
Amorphous metals have higher tensile yield strengths and higher elastic strain limits than polycrystalline metal alloys, but their ductilities and fatigue strengths are lower.
Amorphous alloys have a variety of potentially useful properties. In particular, they tend to be stronger than crystalline alloys of similar chemical composition, and they can sustain larger reversible ("elastic") deformations than crystalline alloys. Amorphous metals derive their strength directly from their non-crystalline structure, which does not have defects (such as dislocations) that limit their strength. Vitreloy is an amorphous metal with a tensile strength almost double that of high-grade titanium. However, metallic glasses at room temperature are not ductile and tend to fail suddenly and surprisingly when loaded in tension, which limits applicability in reliability-critical applications. Metal matrix composites consisting of a ductile crystalline metal matrix containing dendritic particles or fibers of an amorphous glass metal are an alternative.
Perhaps the most useful property of bulk amorphous alloys is that they are true glasses, which means that they soften and flow upon heating. This allows for easy processing, such as by injection molding, in much the same way as polymers. As a result, amorphous alloys have been commercialized for use in sports equipment, medical devices, and as cases for electronic equipment.
Thin films of amorphous metals can be deposited as protective coatings via high velocity oxygen fuel.
Applications
Commercial
The most important application exploits the magnetic properties of some ferromagnetic metallic glasses. The low magnetization loss is used in high efficiency transformers at line frequency and in some higher frequency transformers. Amorphous steel is very brittle that makes it difficult to punch into motor laminations. Electronic article surveillance (such as passive ID tags) often uses metallic glasses because of these magnetic properties.
Ti-based metallic glass, when made into thin pipes, have a high tensile strength of 2,100 MPa (300 ksi), elastic elongation of 2% and high corrosion resistance. A Ti–Zr–Cu–Ni–Sn metallic glass was used to improve the sensitivity of a Coriolis flow meter. This flow meter is about 28-53 times more sensitive than conventional meters, which can be applied in fossil-fuel, chemical, environmental, semiconductor and medical science industries.
Zr-Al-Ni-Cu based metallic glass can be shaped into 2.2 to 5 by 4 mm (0.087 to 0.197 by 0.157 in) pressure sensors for automobile and other industries. Such sensors are smaller, more sensitive, and possess greater pressure endurance than conventional stainless steel. Additionally, this alloy was used to make the world's smallest geared motor with diameter 1.5 and 9.9 mm (0.059 and 0.390 in) at the time.
Potential
Amorphous metals exhibit unique softening behavior above their glass transition and this softening has been increasingly explored for thermoplastic forming of metallic glasses. Such low softening temperature supports simple methods for making nanoparticle composites (e.g. carbon nanotubes) and bulk metallic glasses. Metallic glasses can be patterned on scales as small as 10 nm.
Electronics
This may solve problems of nanoimprint lithography where silicon nano-molds are expensive and break easily. Nano-molds made from metallic glasses are easy to fabricate and more durable.
The superior electronic, thermal and mechanical properties of bulk metallic glasses compared to polymers make them a good candidate for nanocomposites for electronic applications such as field electron emission devices.
Biomedical
Ti40Cu36Pd14Zr10 is claimed to be noncarcinogenic, about three times stronger than titanium, with an elastic modulus that nearly matches bones. It has high wear resistance and does not produce abrasion powder. The alloy does not undergo shrinkage on solidification. A surface structure can be generated that is biologically attachable by surface modification using laser pulses, allowing better joining with bone for applications such as joint replacement.
Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) has been used to process Zr-based bulk metallic glass (BMG) for biomedical applications. Zr-based BMGs shows good biocompatibility, supporting osteoblastic cell growth similar to Ti-6Al-4V. The favorable response coupled with the ability to tailor surface properties through SLM highlights the promise of SLM Zr- based BMGs like AMLOY-ZR01 for orthopaedic implant applications. However, their degradation under inflammatory conditions requires further investigation.
Mg60Zn35Ca5 is under investigation as a biomaterial for implantation into bones as screws, pins, or plates, and to fix fractures. Unlike traditional steel or titanium, this material dissolves in organisms at a rate of roughly 1 millimeter per month and is replaced with bone tissue. This speed can be adjusted by varying the zinc content.
Military
SAM2X5-630 is claimed to have the highest recorded plasticity of any steel alloy, essentially the highest threshold at which a material can withstand an impact without deforming permanently. The alloy can withstand pressure up to 12.5 GPa (123,000 atm) without permanent deformation. This is the highest impact resistance of any bulk metallic glass as of 2016. This makes it as an attractive option for armour material and other applications that require high stress tolerance.
Electric motors
Amorphous iron-based alloys can reduce hysteresis losses in electric motors by 75–90% under typical operating conditions (50–400 Hz). Avoiding grain boundaries and magnetocrystalline anisotropy avoids “pinning” domain walls, allowing high coercivity (typically 30–100 A/m).
Additive manufacturing
One challenge when synthesising a metallic glass is that the techniques often only produce very small samples, due to the need for high cooling rates. 3D-printing methods have been suggested as a method to create larger bulk samples. Selective laser melting (SLM) is one example of an additive manufacturing method that has been used to make iron based metallic glasses. Laser foil printing (LFP) is another method where foils of the amorphous metals are stacked and welded together, layer by layer.
Modeling and theory
Bulk metallic glasses have been modeled using atomic scale simulations (within the density functional theory framework) in a similar manner to high entropy alloys. This has allowed predictions to be made about their behavior, stability and many more properties. As such, new bulk metallic glass systems can be tested and tailored for a specific purpose (e.g. bone replacement or aero-engine component) without as much empirical searching of the phase space or experimental trial and error. Ab-initio molecular dynamics (MD) simulation confirmed that the atomic surface structure of a Ni-Nb metallic glass observed by scanning tunneling microscopy is a kind of spectroscopy. At negative applied bias it visualizes only one sort of atoms (Ni) owing to the structure of electronic density of states calculated using ab-initio MD simulation.
One common way to try and understand the electronic properties of amorphous metals is by comparing them to liquid metals, which are similarly disordered, and for which established theoretical frameworks exist. For simple amorphous metals, good estimations can be reached by semi-classical modelling of the movement of individual electrons using the Boltzmann equation and approximating the scattering potential as the superposition of the electronic potential of each nucleus in the surrounding metal. To simplify the calculations, the electronic potentials of the atomic nuclei can be truncated to give a muffin-tin pseudopotential. In this theory, there are two main effects that govern the change of resistivity with increasing temperatures. Both are based on the induction of vibrations of the atomic nuclei of the metal as temperatures increase. One is, that the atomic structure gets increasingly smeared out as the exact positions of the atomic nuclei get less and less well defined. The other is the introduction of phonons. While the smearing out generally decreases the resistivity of the metal, the introduction of phonons generally adds scattering sites and therefore increases resistivity. Together, they can explain the anomalous decrease of resistivity in amorphous metals, as the first part outweighs the second. In contrast to regular crystalline metals, the phonon contribution in an amorphous metal does not get frozen out at low temperatures. Due to the lack of a defined crystal structure, there are always some phonon wavelengths that can be excited. While this semi-classical approach holds well for many amorphous metals, it generally breaks down under more extreme conditions. At very low temperatures, the quantum nature of the electrons leads to long range interference effects of the electrons with each other in what is called "weak localization effects". In very strongly disordered metals, impurities in the atomic structure can induce bound electronic states in what is called "Anderson localization", effectively binding the electrons and inhibiting their movement.

Anthracite iron or anthracite pig iron is iron extracted by the smelting together of anthracite coal and iron ore, that is using anthracite coal instead of charcoal in iron smelting. This was an important technical advance in the late-1830s, enabling a great acceleration of the Industrial Revolution in the United States and in Europe.
History
Unlike many seminal advances, the contributors, place and date of this epoch are well recorded within specific moments in the late 1830s. The first repeatable and reliably successful furnaces and smelts were managed by the same person in both the United Kingdom and the United States, in the principal control and supervision of ironmaster David Thomas, who began experimenting with attempts to use locally available Welsh anthracite deposits as early as 1820 soon after he became in charge at Yniscedewin Iron Works in Wales.
Around this 1837-38 timeframe, experiments were also being made in Pennsylvania near Port Carbon and in present-day Jim Thorpe, but with overall better success than in Wales. Lehigh Coal & Navigation Company (LC&N) and their two founders, Josiah White and Erskine Hazard, began systematic experiments to smelt using anthracite in two furnaces in Jim Thorpe in 1832–1837 with intermittent, but sporadically improved successes using cold blast processes with two differently designed furnaces.
After experimenting for nearly a decade in two cold blast furnaces built in present-day Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania, LC&N Co.'s White and Hazard went recruiting in Wales after news reached them Anthracite pig iron was regularly and reliably being produced in George Crane's Yniscedwyn Iron Works, by David Thomas. Catasauqua Creek, about six miles below the Lehigh Gap and 14–15 miles (23–24 km) from the company offices in Mauch Chunk, now known as Jim Thorpe, was chosen for a new joint venture by LC&N and David Thomas, the Lehigh Crane Iron Works. After building infrastructure, including a firebrick works, a second blast furnace was under construction when on July 4, 1840, the first hot blast furnace in North America produced Anthracite pig iron, a necessary precursor to creating wrought iron and cast iron.
The first American smelt of anthracite pig iron was performed July 4, 1840 by principal-partners David Thomas, Josiah White and Erskine Hazard at their Lehigh Crane Iron Works in their first hot blast furnace along Catasauqua Creek aided by Samuel Thomas and the employees of the LCIW, in what became Catasauqua, Pennsylvania in the Lehigh Valley region of eastern Pennsylvania. The technology enabled industries the chance to produce cast iron sufficient to demand and eventually adapt production to also feed the demand to generate wrought iron and steel. These useful materials are achieved by adding additional processing—by taking pig iron as an ingredient into a reverberatory furnace (and in later years, a Bessemer converter).
Anthracite, also known as stone coal or rock coal, is very difficult to ignite, mine, clean, and break into smaller chunks and requires correct conditions to build heat or hold temperature and sustain burning—which often depend upon the size and uniformity of the coal particles. Yet American cities were cramped for fuels, woodlands were exhausted near bigger towns and Philadelphia, the largest city in America, also needed fuels for mills and foundries to sustain manufacturing. Inventor and industrialist Josiah White (owner of a wire mill, foundry and nail factory), had determined how to burn anthracite in iron working processing furnaces during the War of 1812, but its use in smelting operations was hit or miss, dependent upon the material packing geometries of any particular charging load in a cold blast furnace. The earlier development of coking of bituminous coal, as well as anthracite coke enabled the smelting of iron using local coal sources with cold blast air in blast furnaces after the latter 1830s allowed the production of vast quantities of iron that established the fundamental infrastructure of the early North American Industrial Revolution, which was built on iron products and only some steel. At the time, iron was used minimally with respect to wood. Even most railroad tracks were laid with wooden rails, sometimes covered by iron strapping. As more iron became available, more uses were found for it, creating a cycle of increasing demand, experimentation and improvements as part of the Industrial Revolution.
Development of the process
During the United States' first energy crisis, stands of forest near larger towns and America's Eastern Seaboard cities became further and further from population and factory centers, raising the price of fuel for heating and smithies, especially clean burning charcoal—long the fuel of preference for smelting and glass making, creating a decades long search for alternative fuels. By mid-1792, prominent Philadelphians had formed the Lehigh Coal Mine Company (LHCM Co.) to bring anthracite to cities reachable via the Delaware River Valley, especially Philadelphia, the nation's largest and most industrialized city at the time, though no one fully understood how to use anthracite as a sole fuel—just that it 'could' burn 'some' of the time with a hot enough base fire, so could augment furnace fuels.
The LHCM Co. had great difficulty getting many ark-loads of coal to the docks in Philadelphia, much less having capabilities to make reliable deliveries of the fuel to industries risking its use for the 46–47 miles (74–76 km) trip from Lausanne along the Lehigh River's variable water height and many rocks and rapids then surviving the over 70 miles (110 km) on the equally untamed Delaware River. In the midst of the War of 1812, iron industry magnate Josiah White set his foremen to systematically conducting experiments as how stone coal could be made to burn reliably. It was recognized as some use aiding other fuels, and pack animal loads occasionally reached the city, which had mills and foundries desperately needing to circumvent the British Naval Blockade, so Bituminous Coal coastal shipments up from Virginia might resume. These experiments established a bottom draught, and closed doors were the key.
Before the war, Baltimore, Boston, Newark, New Haven, New York City, and Philadelphia industrialists were importing bituminous via shipload from Virginia and Great Britain, and these supplies became difficult to obtain or blocked politically by the war and its preceding embargoes on British goods. After the war, the sanctions continued until various boundary disputes were resolved as far away as The Oregon Country and the Columbia River basin.
Historical backdrop
Between 1814 and 1818, industries along the Eastern seaboard were still thirsting for energy relief when inquiries to the LHCM Co. by Hazard and White indicated the operation and rights of the company were available. Frustrated by the sluggish progress of improvements that would become the Schuylkill Canal, White and Hazard applied to the Pennsylvania legislature for the rights to improve and operate navigations upon the rapids-strewn Lehigh River. This initiated the process that lead to the Lehigh Canal, which was the beginning of regular high volume and reliable coal deliveries in late 1820. The flood of anthracite proved influential in the industrialization of the next century.
Iron from Anthracite smelting
Research into the smelting of iron using anthracite coal (without coking it first) began in the 1820s in Wales by Thomas, experiments in France, most notably by Gueymard and Robin at Vizille in 1827, and in the 1830s in Pottsville and Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania. Early attempts tried to gradually substitute anthracite for other fuels, such as coke or charcoal, but all failed due to the use of cold blast techniques, which generated insufficient heat to keep the anthracite in regenerative combustion. In the same timeframe, Thomas had also continued experimenting with mixes of Anthracite and other fuels, before he combined those experiments and the new hot blast processing.
Mr. Thomas determined that the hot-blast was just what was wanted for an anthracite furnace. He returned to Yniscedwin with a license from Mr. Neilson, and an expert mechanic who understood the construction of beating ovens, and at once proceeded to construct hot-blast ovens, and erected them at the furnace which was known as the 'Cupola furnace,' 11 feet bosh by 45 feet high. The furnace was blown in, February 5, 1837; the success was complete, and anthracite-iron continued to be profitably made from said furnace without intermission.
Anthracite-iron was a new-born commodity in the commerce of the world, and David Thomas was its godfather. The news of his success spread over the United Kingdom; the London Mining Journal gave it great prominence, and an account of the discovery appeared in the press of the United States.
In May 1837, Solomon W. Roberts of Philadelphia came to Yniscedwin, saw the furnace in operation, and at once reported to his uncle, Josiah White, of the Lehigh Coal and Navigation Company, the successful application of the hot blast there. At this time, 1837-38, the Lehigh Coal & Navigation Company, and other companies whose splendid mines cluster in the neighborhood of Mauch Chunk, Pa., were experimenting in the use of anthracite in the blast-furnace, but with such small success that it was determined to send Mr. Erskine Hazard, one of the leading spirits of the company, and afterwards the leading spirit of the Lehigh Crane Iron Company, over to Wales, to investigate, the practice at Yniscedwin and engage a competent person to come to this country to superintend the erection of furnaces on the Lehigh.
Mr. Hazard arrived in November 1838 and found the furnace in full and successful operation.
In the United States, where the Lehigh Coal & Navigation Company (LC&N) had begun shipping anthracite to Philadelphia in 1820 because the principles could not obtain sufficient fuels for their iron works at the 'Falls of the Schuylkill' —so had built the Lehigh Canal and taken over the works of the haphazard Lehigh Coal Mine Company—by the late 1820s having established works that were running smoothly, after building America's second operating railroad in 1827, they'd great interest in exploiting the great anthracite deposits of Schuylkill County for ironmaking, which mills foundries were their principle businesses.
The Franklin Institute, in 1830, offered a gold medal to the manufacturer of the greatest quantity of anthracite iron, and Nicholas Biddle and his associates offered a prize of $5,000 to the first individual to smelt a certain quantity of iron ore within a given time, using anthracite. The Lehigh Coal & Navigation, by then an industrial giant of the times, also offered free water power and discount rates on coal and shipping to encourage the development of the process.
The first key breakthrough occurred in 1828–29, when Scotsman James Beaumont Neilson patented the hot blast technique & process, which he had conceived in an attempt to improve the efficiency of conventionally fueled furnaces. The first person to employ the hot blast technique to anthracite smelting was Dr. Frederick W. Gesenhainer, who filed for a patent on the process in 1831 and received it in 1833. In 1836, he tried smelting anthracite iron on a practical scale at his property, Valley Furnace, near Pottsville, Pennsylvania, while in the same year White & Hazard's LC&N Co. built two experimental blast furnaces in Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania. He produced a small quantity of iron, but due to mechanical breakdowns, could not keep the furnace in operation for more than two months. While distinguished visitors, including Governor Joseph Ritner, acknowledged his success, he sold out his share in Valley Furnace and went to New York City.
The research was proceeding along parallel lines across the Atlantic. George Crane, owner, and David Thomas, superintendent of the Yniscedwyn Iron Works, had themselves conceived of the idea of using hot blast to smelt anthracite. Thomas was sent to Scotland to examine Neilson's installation and reproduced it at Yniscedwyn. Crane filed for a British patent on smelting iron with anthracite and hot blast in 1836 and received it in 1837. By the time the patent was sealed, Yniscedwyn was producing about 35 tons of iron using anthracite only as a fuel.
Inspired both by Geisenhainer and Crane (whose success was closely followed by the LC&N), experiments in the US continued. Baughman, Guiteau and Company used an old furnace near Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania, to produce some anthracite iron during late 1837. They built another experimental furnace nearby, which was worked for about two months during fall and winter 1838 and for some time in 1839, but mechanical deficiencies led them to abandon the furnace at the end of 1839. In the meantime, Pioneer Furnace, in Pottsville, was blown in using anthracite fuel in 1839. It was built by William Lyman obtained the aid of a Welsh emigrant, Benjamin Perry, who was familiar with Neilson's process and the Yniscedwyn works, for the blowing-in. The furnace ran for three months on anthracite alone and fulfilled the conditions to win the $5,000 prize. In the design of Pioneer Furnace, Lyman had also been assisted by David Thomas, who had arrived in the United States in May 1839. Thomas was engaged by the LC&N to set up the Lehigh Crane Iron Company and its first furnace at Catasauqua, which went into blast in 1840, along with five other anthracite furnaces. This marked the commercial establishment of anthracite iron production in the United States.
Decline
The opening of bituminous coal deposits suitable for coking in the western part of the Allegheny Plateau resulted in the gradual displacement of anthracite as a fuel. The production of coke-fired furnaces overtook that of anthracite-fired furnaces in 1875, and the last anthracite furnaces in the US, the former Lock Ridge Iron Company, converted to coke in 1914.
Explanatory notes
Citations
Sources
Fred Brenckman (1884). HISTORY OF CARBON COUNTY PENNSYLVANIA. Harrisburg, PA: J. Nungesser.
General references
Bartholomew, Ann M.; Metz, Lance E.; Kneis, Michael (1989). Delaware and Lehigh Canals (First ed.). Bethlehem, Pennsylvania: Oak Printing Company. pp. 4–5. ISBN 0-930973-09-7. LCCN 89-25150 – via Center for Canal History and Technology, Hugh Moore Historical Park and Museum, Inc., Easton, Pennsylvania.
Bartholomew, Craig L.; Metz, Lance E. (1988). Bartholomew, Ann (ed.). The Anthracite Industry of the Lehigh Valley. Center for Canal History and Technology. ISBN 0-930973-08-9.
Gordon, Robert B. (1996). American Iron 1607–1900. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-6816-5.
Korson, George (1960). Black Rock: Mining Folklore of the Pennsylvania Dutch. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press.

Anthracology (from anthrax (ἄνθραξ), the Greek word for coal) is the analysis and identification of charcoal which is preserved after carbonization, based on wood anatomy. The remains of carbonized wood come from archaeological sites and sediments, and may yield evidence of natural or anthropogenic paleo-fires. Anthracological studies are also applied to extant material, such as the inspection of charcoal of illegal provenance. The discipline was started in Brazil by Rita Scheel-Ybert in the late 1990s, but the identification of species from carbonized wood dates from the end of the 19th century. The working methods back then (based on the preparation of thin sections) were difficult and time-consuming, and research did not have a paleo-environmental approach. From the 1970s on, the use of reflected light microscopes, mainly from France by Professor Jean-Louis Vernet, allowed the multiplication of anthracological analysis, prompting the appearance of paleo-ecological studies. Anthracological analyses in Southern Brazil and in the Central Amazon have extended the knowledge of early settlements, their environmental resources and fuel economy, and the use of wood in ritual contexts. The conservation of carbonized fruits, seeds, roots and tubers has furthered the knowledge of diet and food production issues.
Background
Anthracology is a method of study for Archaeology. Archaeological sediments are usually very rich in charcoal fragments, which identification provides interpretations on the landscape, paleovegetation, relations between humans and their environment, and plants use by ancient populations. Besides the paleoenvironmental perspective that allows the reconstitution of past plant formations and, therefore, of the paleoclimate, this discipline offers important palaeoethnobotanical information regarding the utilization of wood in everyday basis and also in rituals, including also the subsistence of ancient populations, by means of conservation of carbonized dietary remains.
The anthracological analysis of archaeological charcoal is already largely acknowledged as a reliable tool for palaeoenvironmental reconstruction. The development of this discipline, in Brazil, has been marked by a strong preoccupation with the definition of appropriate methodologies, seeking both palaeoenvironmental and palaeoethnobotanical information that are committed to archaeological issues.
Anthracological analyses in sambaquis and Tupi-Guarani sites on Southern and Southeastern Brazil, as well as in ceramic sites in Central Amazon, have been essential to broaden our knowledge about the landscape in the areas where such settlements were established, the environmental resources, site catchment area, fuel economy, and use of wood in quotidian and ritual contexts. More recently, anthracological analysis has proven itself an important tool to support archaeological interpretation, helping to elucidate site formation processes and providing more consistent information on the site's functional aspects.
Besides that, the conservation of carbonized fruits, seeds, and underground organs remains (roots and tubers) have enabled the approaching of diet and food production issues.
Anthracology and dendrology
Dendrology studies associated to anthracological analyses make possible to estimate the minimum diameter of charred woods on the basis of the angulation of the rays. The first studies on this research line took place on the Black Forest, in Germany, where it was possible to recognize the effect of anthropical activities on the forest structure and composition (Ludemann, 2002, 2008; Ludemann & Nelle, 2002; Ludemann et al., 2004; Nelle, 2002).
Geoanthracology
The study of charcoal of sedimentary origin (soils, paleosoils or sedimentary deposit) provides essentially palaeoenvironmental information, allowing the reconstitution of previous vegetation and palaeoclimate. Important information on the relations between past vegetation, forest fires, and climate changes are being obtained from several studies performed in Europe and North America.
In Brazil, anthracological analyses coupled with the study of the isotopic composition of the soil at the state of São Paulo made possible to establish that the climate of that region was drier during the beginning of the Holocene and moister right after that period, as it is nowadays, from ca. 3000 years BP (Scheel-Ybert et al., 2003).
Legal control of charcoal production
Anthracological studies may also be used for conservationist and technological approaches, as in detecting species of illegal provenience and determining charcoal quality. The use of Anthracology in Brazil as a tool to identify and, therefore, inspect and control charcoal production has important conservationist character since the country is the world's main charcoal producer. Although such charcoal (which is mainly destined for the steel industry) may be regarded as renewable energy, its environmental impact is actually strong, since a huge part of it is the result of illegal extraction from native forests.

An anvil is a metalworking tool consisting of a large block of metal (usually forged or cast steel), with a flattened top surface, upon which another object is struck (or "worked").
Anvils are massive because having higher inertia allows them to more efficiently cause the energy of striking tools to be transferred to the work piece. In most cases an anvil is used as a forging tool. Before the advent of modern welding technology, it was the primary tool of metal workers.
A great majority of modern anvils are made of cast steel that has been heat-treated by either flame or electric induction. Inexpensive anvils have been made of cast iron and low-quality steel, but are considered unsuitable for serious use, as they deform and lack rebound when struck.
Structure
The primary work surface of the anvil is known as the face. It is generally made of hardened steel and should be flat and smooth with rounded edges for most work. Any marks on the face will be transferred to the work. Also, sharp edges tend to cut into the metal being worked and may cause cracks to form in the workpiece. The face is hardened and tempered to resist the blows of the smith's hammer, so the anvil face does not deform under repeated use. A hard anvil face also reduces the amount of force lost in each hammer blow. Hammers, tools, and work pieces of hardened steel should never directly strike the anvil face with full force, as they may damage it; this can result in chipping or deforming of the anvil face.
The horn of the anvil is a conical projection used to form various round shapes and is generally unhardened steel or iron. The horn is used mostly in bending operations. It also is used by some smiths as an aid in "drawing down" stock (making it longer and thinner). Some anvils, mainly European, are made with two horns, one square and one round. Also, some anvils are made with side horns or clips for specialized work.
The step is the area of the anvil between the "horn" and the "face". It is soft and is used for cutting; its purpose is to prevent damaging the steel face of the anvil by conducting such operations there and so as not to damage the cutting edge of the chisel, though many smiths shun this practice as it will damage the anvil over time.
There have also been other additions to the anvil such as an upsetting block; this is used to upset steel, generally in long strips/bars as it is placed between the feet of the anvil. Upsetting is a technique often used by blacksmiths for making the steel workpiece short and thick, having probably been originally long and thin.
The hardy hole is a square hole into which specialized forming and cutting tools, called hardy tools, are placed. It is also used in punching and bending operations. These are not to be confused with swage blocks, although their purpose is similar.
The pritchel hole is a small round hole that is present on most modern anvils. Some anvils have more than one. It is used mostly for punching. At times, smiths will fit a second tool to this hole to allow the smith more flexibility when using more than one anvil tool.
Placement
The anvil is placed as near to the forge as is convenient, generally no more than one step from the forge to prevent heat loss in the work piece.
An anvil needs to be placed upon a sturdy base made from an impact and fire resistant material. Common methods of attaching an anvil are spikes, chains, steel or iron straps, clips, bolts where there are holes provided, and cables.
The most common base traditionally was a hard wood log or large timber buried several feet into the floor of the forge shop. In the industrial era, cast-iron bases became available. They had the advantage of adding additional weight to the anvil, making it more stable. These bases are highly sought after by collectors today. When concrete became widely available, there was a trend to make steel-reinforced anvil bases by some smiths, though this practice has largely been abandoned. In more modern times, anvils have been placed upon bases fabricated from steel, often a short thick section of a large I-beam. In addition, bases have been made from dimensional lumber bolted together to form a large block or steel drums full of oil-saturated sand to provide a damping effect. In recent times, tripod bases of fabricated steel have become popular.
Types
There are many designs for anvils, which are often tailored for a specific purpose or to meet the needs of a particular smith. For example, there were anvils specifically made for farriers, general smiths, cutlers, chain makers, armorers, saw tuners, coach makers, coopers, and many other types of metal workers. Most of these anvil types look similar, but some are radically different. Saw maker anvils, for instance, are generally large rectangular blocks of steel that have a harder surface than most other anvils due to hammering on a harder steel for saws. Bladesmith anvils tend to be rectangular with a hardy and pritchel, but no horn. Such designs have originated in diverse geographic locations. Several styles of anvils include Bavarian, French Pig anvil, Austrian, and Chinese turtle anvil.
The Bavarian style is known for the sloped brow. The brow was first used in medieval times to make armor on the church windows below the brow. Common manufactures include Söding Halbach and Holthaus. This style of anvil is known not to sway in the face due to the extra mass with the brow.
The common blacksmith's anvil is made of either forged or cast steel, forged wrought iron with a hard steel face or cast iron with a hard steel face. Cast-iron anvils are not used for forging as they are incapable of standing up to the impact and will crack and dent. Also, cast-iron anvils without a hard steel face do not have the rebound that a harder anvil would and will tire out the smith. Historically, some anvils have been made with a smooth top working face of hardened steel welded to a cast-iron or wrought-iron body, though this manufacturing method is no longer in use. At one end, the common smith's anvil has a projecting conical bick (beak, horn) used for hammering curved work pieces. The other end is typically called the heel. Occasionally, the other end is also provided with a bick, partly rectangular in section. Most anvils made since the late 18th century also have a hardy hole and a pritchel hole where various tools, such as the anvil-cutter or hot chisel, can be inserted and held by the anvil. Some anvils have several hardy and pritchel holes, to accommodate a wider variety of hardy tools and pritchels. An anvil may also have a softer pad for chisel work.
An anvil for a power hammer is usually supported on a massive anvil block, sometimes weighing over 800 tons for a 12-ton hammer; this again rests on a strong foundation of timber and masonry or concrete.
An anvil may have a marking indicating its weight, manufacturer, or place of origin. American-made anvils were often marked in pounds. European anvils are sometimes marked in kilograms. English anvils were often marked in hundredweight, the marking consisting of three numbers, indicating hundredweight, quarter hundredweight and pounds. For example, a 3-1-5, if such an anvil existed, would be 3×112 lb + 1×28 lb + 5 lb = 369 lb ≈ 168 kg.
Cheap anvils made from inferior steel or cast iron and often sold at retail hardware stores, are considered unsuitable for serious use, and are often derisively referred to as "ASOs", or "anvil shaped objects". In recent years, inexpensive cast steel anvils with hardened faces have become common, often sold online. Some blacksmiths consider these anvils suitable for beginners. Amateur smiths have used lengths of railroad rail, forklift tines, or even simple blocks of steel as makeshift anvils.
A metalworking vise may have a small anvil integrated into its design.
History
Anvils were first made of stone, then bronze, and later wrought iron. As steel became more readily available, anvils were faced with it. This was done to give the anvil a hard face and to stop the anvil from deforming from impact. Many regional styles of anvils evolved through time from the simple block that was first used by smiths. The majority of anvils found today in the US are based on the London pattern anvil of the mid-19th century.
The wrought-iron steel-faced anvil was produced up until the early 20th century. Through the 19th and very early 20th centuries, this method of construction evolved to produce extremely high-quality anvils. The basic process involved forge-welding billets of wrought iron together to produce the desired shape. The sequence and location of the forge-welds varied between different anvil makers and the kind of anvil being made. At the same time cast-iron anvils with steel faces were being made in the United States. At the dawn of the 20th century solid cast-steel anvils began to be produced, as well as two-piece forged anvils made from closed-die forgings. Modern anvils are generally made entirely from steel.
There are many references to anvils in ancient Greek and Egyptian writings, including Homer's works. They have been found at the Calico Early Man Site in North America.
Anvils have since lost their former commonness, along with the smiths who used them. Mechanized production has made cheap and abundant manufactured goods readily available. The one-off handmade products of the blacksmith are less economically viable in the modern world, while in the past they were an absolute necessity. However, anvils are still used by blacksmiths and metal workers of all kinds in producing custom work. They are also essential to the work done by farriers.
In popular culture
Firing
Anvil firing is the practice of firing an anvil into the air using gunpowder. It has been popular in California, the eastern United States and the southern United States, much like how fireworks are used today. There is a growing interest in re-enacting this "ancient tradition" in the US, which has now spread to England.
Television and film
A typical metalworker's anvil, with horn at one end and flat face at the other, is a standard prop for cartoon gags, as the epitome of a heavy and clumsy object that is perfect for dropping onto people. This visual metaphor is common, for example, in Warner Brothers' Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies shorts, such as those with Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner. Anvils in cartoons were also referenced in an episode of Gilmore Girls, where one of the main characters tries to have a conversation about "Where did all the anvils go?", a reference to their falling out of use on a general scale. Animaniacs made frequent gags on the topic throughout its run, even having a kingdom named Anvilania, whose sole national product is anvils.
Books
Dwarves were blacksmiths who used anvils for metalworking in C. S. Lewis's The Chronicles of Narnia, most iconically on The Magician's Nephew and Prince Caspian; as well as in J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit.
Music
Anvils have been used as percussion instruments in several famous musical compositions, including:
Louis Andriessen: De Materie (Part I), which features an extended solo for two anvils
Kurt Atterberg: Symphony No. 5
Daniel Auber: opera Le Maçon
Alan Silvestri: The Mummy Returns
Arnold Bax: Symphony No. 3
The Beatles: "Maxwell's Silver Hammer" makes prominent use of the anvil. Their roadie Mal Evans played the anvil.
Benjamin Britten: The Burning Fiery Furnace
Aaron Copland: Symphony No. 3
Don Davis: The Matrix trilogy
Brad Fiedel: The Terminator
Neil Finn: "Song of the Lonely Mountain," written for the end credits of The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey
Gustav Holst: Second Suite in F for Military Band, which includes a movement titled "Song of the Blacksmith"
Nicholas Hooper: Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
James Horner: Used it extensively in Aliens, and his other films such as Flightplan, The Forgotten and Titanic
Anvil: "Metal on Metal"
Metallica: "For Whom the Bell Tolls"
Randy Newman: Toy Story 3
Carl Orff: Antigone
Howard Shore: The Lord of the Rings film trilogy. Used predominantly for the theme of Isengard.
Juan María Solare: Veinticinco de agosto, 1983 and Un ángel de hielo y fuego
John Philip Sousa: Dwellers of the Western World, in which the second movement, The White Man, calls for two pairs of anvils, the one small, the other large
Johann Strauss II: Der Zigeunerbaron (The Gipsy Baron; 1885): Ja, da wird das Eisen gefüge
Josef Strauss: Feuerfest!, op. 269 (1869). The title means "fireproof". This was the slogan of the Wertheim fireproof safe company, which commissioned the work.
Edgard Varèse: Ionisation
Giuseppe Verdi: Il Trovatore, featuring the famous Anvil Chorus
Richard Wagner: Der Ring des Nibelungen in Das Rheingold in scene 3, using 18 anvils tuned in F in three octaves, and Siegfried in act I, notably Siegfried's "Forging Song" (Nothung! Nothung! Neidliches Schwert!)
William Walton: Belshazzar's Feast
John Williams: Jaws, Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith
Carl Michael Ziehrer: Der Traum eines österreichischen Reservisten (1890)
The Longest Johns: Hammer and the Anvil (2022)
Wagner's Ring des Nibelungen is notable in using the anvil as pitched percussion. The vast majority of extant works use the anvil as unpitched. However tuned anvils are available as musical instruments, albeit unusual. These are not to be confused with the "sawyers' anvils" used to "tune" big circular saw blades. Steel anvils are used for tuning for use as musical instruments, because those based partly on cast iron and similar materials give a duller sound; this is actually valued in industry, as pure steel anvils are troublesomely noisy, though energetically more efficient. The hammer and anvil have enjoyed varying popularity in orchestral roles. Robert Donington pointed out that Sebastian Virdung notes them in his book of 1510, and Martin Agricola includes it in his list of instruments (Musica instrumentalis deudsch, 1529) largely as a compliment to Pythagoras. In pre-modern or modern times anvils occasionally appear in operatic works by Berlioz, Bizet, Gounod, Verdi, and Wagner for example. Commonly pairs of anvils tuned a third apart are used.
In practice modern orchestras commonly substitute a brake drum or other suitable steel structure that is easier to tune than an actual anvil, although a visibly convincing anvil-shaped prop may be shown as desired. In Das Rheingold Wagner scored for nine little, six mid-sized, and three large anvils, but orchestras seldom can afford instrumentation on such a scale.

The Architectural Woodwork Institute (AWI), founded in 1953, is an American professional trade association. Member companies are the fabricators of fine finished woodwork, millwork, and furniture. AWI has published a Standard of Care for woodworking since 1961, called the Quality Standards Illustrated.

An arrow is a fin-stabilized projectile launched by a bow. A typical arrow usually consists of a long, stiff, straight shaft with a weighty (and usually sharp and pointed) arrowhead attached to the front end, multiple fin-like stabilizers called fletchings mounted near the rear, and a slot at the rear end called a nock for engaging the bowstring. A container or bag carrying additional arrows for convenient reloading is called a quiver.
The use of bows and arrows by humans predates recorded history and is common to most cultures. A craftsman who makes arrows is a fletcher, and one who makes arrowheads is an arrowsmith.
History
The oldest evidence of likely arrowheads, dating to c. 64,000 years ago, were found in Sibudu Cave, current South Africa. Likely arrowheads made from animal bones have been discovered in the Fa Hien Cave in Sri Lanka which are also the oldest evidence for the use of arrows outside of Africa dating to c. 48,000 years ago. The oldest evidence of the use of bows to shoot arrows dates to about 10,000 years ago; it is based on pinewood arrows found in the Ahrensburg valley north of Hamburg. They had shallow grooves on the base, indicating that they were shot from a bow. The oldest bow so far recovered is about 8,000 years old, found in the Holmegård swamp in Denmark. Archery seems to have arrived in the Americas with the Arctic small tool tradition, about 4,500 years ago.
Size
Arrow sizes vary greatly across cultures, ranging from eighteen inches to five feet (45 cm to 152 cm). However, most modern arrows are 75 cm (30 in) to 96 cm (38 in) in length. Arrows recovered from the Mary Rose, an English warship that sank in 1545 whose remains were raised in 1982, were mostly 76 cm (30 in) long. Very short arrows have been used, shot through a guide attached either to the bow (an "overdraw") or to the archer's wrist (the Turkish "siper"). These may fly farther than heavier arrows, and an enemy without suitable equipment may find himself unable to return them.
Components
Shaft
The shaft is the primary structural element of the arrow, to which the other components are attached. Traditional arrow shafts are made from strong, lightweight wood, bamboo, or reeds, while modern shafts may be made from aluminium, carbon fibre reinforced plastic, or a combination of materials (like copper and various minerals). Such shafts are typically made from an aluminium core wrapped with a carbon fibre outer. A traditional premium material is Port Orford Cedar.
Spine
The stiffness of the shaft is known as its spine, referring to how little the shaft bends when compressed, hence an arrow which bends less is said to have more spine. In order to strike consistently, a group of arrows must be similarly spined. "Center-shot" bows, in which the arrow passes through the central vertical axis of the bow riser, may obtain consistent results from arrows with a wide range of spines. However, most traditional bows are not center-shot and the arrow has to deflect around the handle in the archer's paradox; such bows tend to give most consistent results with a narrower range of arrow spine that allows the arrow to deflect correctly around the bow. Bows with higher draw weight will generally require stiffer arrows, with more spine (less flexibility) to give the correct amount of flex when shot.
GPI rating
The weight of an arrow shaft can be expressed in GPI (grains per inch). The length of a shaft in inches multiplied by its GPI rating gives the weight of the shaft in grains. For example, a shaft that is 30 inches (760 mm) long and has a GPI of 9.5 weighs 285 grains (18 grams). This does not include the other elements of a finished arrow, so a complete arrow will be heavier than the shaft alone.
Footed arrows
Sometimes a shaft will be made of two different types of wood fastened together, resulting in what is known as a footed arrow. Known by some as the finest of wood arrows, footed arrows were used both by early Europeans and Native Americans. Footed arrows will typically consist of a short length of hardwood near the head of the arrow, with the remainder of the shaft consisting of softwood. By reinforcing the area most likely to break, the arrow is more likely to survive impact, while maintaining overall flexibility and lighter weight.
Barreled arrow shafts
A barreled arrow shaft is one that tapers in diameter bi-directionally. This allows for an arrow that has an optimum weight yet retains enough strength to resist flex.
Barreled arrow shafts are considered the zenith of pre-industrial archery technology, reaching their peak design among the Ottomans.
Arrowhead
The arrowhead or projectile point is the primary functional part of the arrow, and plays the largest role in determining its purpose. Some arrows may simply use a sharpened tip of the solid shaft, but it is far more common for separate arrowheads to be made, usually from metal, horn, or some other hard material. Arrowheads are usually separated by function:
Bodkin points are short, rigid points with a small cross-section. They were made of unhardened iron and may have been used for better or longer flight, or for cheaper production. It has been mistakenly suggested that the bodkin came into its own as a means of penetrating armour, but research has found no hardened bodkin points, so it is likely that it was first designed either to extend range or as a cheaper and simpler alternative to the broadhead. In a modern test, a direct hit from a hard steel bodkin point penetrated Damascus chain armour. However, archery was not effective against plate armour, which became available to knights of fairly modest means by the late 14th century.
Blunts are unsharpened arrowheads occasionally used for types of target shooting, for shooting at stumps or other targets of opportunity, or hunting small game when the goal is to concuss the target without penetration. Blunts are commonly made of metal or hard rubber. They may stun, and occasionally, the arrow shaft may penetrate the head and the target; safety is still important with blunt arrows.
Judo points have spring wires extending sideways from the tip. These catch on grass and debris to prevent the arrow from being lost in the vegetation. Used for practice and for small game.
Broadheads were used for war and are still used for hunting. Medieval broadheads could be made from steel, sometimes with hardened edges. They usually have two to four sharp blades that cause massive bleeding in the victim. Their function is to deliver a wide cutting edge so as to kill as quickly as possible by cleanly cutting major blood vessels, and cause further trauma on removal. They are expensive, damage most targets, and are usually not used for practice. Broadheads are illegal in the UK.
There are two main types of broadheads used by hunters: the fixed-blade and the mechanical types. While the fixed-blade broadhead keeps its blades rigid and unmovable on the broadhead at all times, the mechanical broadhead deploys its blades upon contact with the target, its blades swinging out to wound the target. The mechanical head flies better because it is more streamlined, but has less penetration as it uses some of the kinetic energy in the arrow to deploy its blades. Preferences for fixed or mechanical broadheads vary widely in the hunting community, typically varying by species. In general, both types are widely used on game up to the size of white-tailed deer; as game size increases, fixed blades become more common. Broadheads used for hunting dangerous game such as African buffalo are almost always fixed-blade.
Field tips or field points are similar to target points and have a distinct shoulder, so that missed outdoor shots do not become as stuck in obstacles such as tree stumps. They are also used for shooting practice by hunters, by offering similar flight characteristics and weights as broadheads, without getting lodged in target materials and causing excessive damage upon removal.
Target points are bullet-shaped with a conical point, designed to penetrate target butts easily without causing excessive damage to them.
Safety arrows are designed to be used in various forms of reenactment combat, to reduce the risk when shot at people. These arrows may have heads that are very wide or padded, such as the large foam ball tip used in archery tag. In combination with bows of restricted draw weight and draw length, these heads may reduce to acceptable levels the risks of shooting arrows at suitably armoured people. The parameters will vary depending on the specific rules being used and on the levels of risk felt acceptable to the participants. For instance, SCA combat rules require a padded head at least 1+1⁄4 in (3.2 cm) in diameter, with bows not exceeding 28 inches (710 mm) and 50 lb (23 kg) of draw for use against well-armoured individuals.
Arrowheads may be attached to the shaft with a cap, a socketed tang, or inserted into a split in the shaft and held by a process called hafting. Points attached with caps are simply slid snugly over the end of the shaft, or may be held on with hot glue. Split-shaft construction involves splitting the arrow shaft lengthwise, inserting the arrowhead, and securing it using a ferrule, sinew, or wire.
Fletchings
Fletchings are found at the back of the arrow and act as airfoils to provide a small amount of force used to stabilize the flight of the arrow. They are designed to keep the arrow pointed in the direction of travel by strongly damping down any tendency to pitch or yaw. Some cultures, for example most in New Guinea, did not use fletching on their arrows. Also, arrows without fletching (called bare shaft) are used for training purposes, because they make certain errors by the archer more visible.
Fletchings are traditionally made from feathers (often from a goose or turkey) bound to the arrow's shaft, but are now often made of plastic (known as "vanes"). Historically, some arrows used for the proofing of armour used copper vanes. Flight archers may use razor blades for fletching, in order to reduce air resistance. With conventional three-feather fletching, one feather, called the "cock" feather, is at a right angle to the nock, and is normally nocked so that it will not contact the bow when the arrow is shot. Four-feather fletching is usually symmetrical and there is no preferred orientation for the nock; this makes nocking the arrow slightly easier.
Natural feathers are usually prepared by splitting and sanding the quill before gluing. Further, the feather may be trimmed to shape, die-cut or burned by a hot electrically heated wire. It is crucial that all the feathers of an arrow have the same drag, so manual trimming is rarely used by modern fletchers. The burning-wire method is popular because different shapes are possible by bending the wire, and the fletching can be symmetrically trimmed after gluing by rotating the arrow on a fixture.
Some fletchings are dyed. Two-toned fletchings usually make each fletching from two feathers knit together. The front fletching is often camouflaged, and the rear fletching bright so that the archer can easily track the arrow.
Artisans who make arrows by hand are known as "fletchers", a word related to the French word for arrow, flèche. This is the same derivation as the verb "fletch", meaning to provide an arrow with its feathers. Glue and thread are the traditional methods of attaching fletchings. A "fletching jig" is often used in modern times, to hold the fletchings in exactly the right orientation on the shaft while the glue hardens.
Whenever natural fletching is used, the feathers on any one arrow must come from the same wing of the bird, the most common being the right-wing flight feathers of turkeys. The slight cupping of natural feathers requires them to be fletched with a right-twist for right wing, a left-twist for left wing. This rotation, through a combination of gyroscopic stabilization and increased drag on the rear of the arrow, helps the arrow to fly straight away. Artificial helical fletchings have the same effect. Most arrows will have three fletches, but some have four or even more. Fletchings generally range from two to six inches (50 to 150 mm) in length; flight arrows intended to travel the maximum possible distance typically have very low fletching, while hunting arrows with broadheads require long and high fletching to stabilize them against the aerodynamic effect of the head. Fletchings may also be cut in different ways, the two most common being parabolic (i.e. a smooth curved shape) and shield (i.e. shaped as one-half of a very narrow shield) cut.
In modern archery with screw-in points, right-hand rotation is generally preferred as it makes the points self-tighten. In traditional archery, some archers prefer a left rotation because it gets the hard (and sharp) quill of the feather farther away from the arrow-shelf and the shooter's hand.
A flu-flu is a type of fletching normally made by using long sections of full length feathers taken from a turkey; in most cases, six or more sections are used rather than the traditional three. Alternatively two long feathers can be spiraled around the end of the arrow shaft. The extra fletching generates more drag and slows the arrow down rapidly after a short distance of about 30 m (98 ft) or so. Flu-flu arrows are often used for hunting birds, or for children's archery, and can also be used to play flu-flu golf.
Wraps
Wraps are thin pre-cut sheets of material, often vinyl or plastic, used to wrap the nock end of an arrow, primarily as an aid in bonding vanes and feather fletchings to the shaft. Wraps can also make the eventual removal of vanes and vane-glue easier. Additionally, they add a decorative aspect to arrow building, which can provide archers an opportunity to personalize their arrows. Brightly colored wraps can also make arrows much easier to find in the brush, and to see in downrange targets.
Nocks
In English it is common to say "nock an arrow" when one readies a shot. A nock is a notch in the rearmost end of an arrow. It helps keep the arrow correctly rotated, keeps the arrow from slipping sideways during the draw or after the release, and helps maximize the arrow's energy (i.e. its range and lethality) by helping an archer place the arrow at the fastest-moving place on the bowstring. Some archers mark the nock position with beads, knots or wrappings of thread. Most compound bow shooters use a D-loop, a length of string material (or sometimes a metal bracket) attached to the string above and below the nocking point. A release aid is typically attached to the D-loop in preparation for a shot.
The main purpose of a nock is to control the rotation of the arrow. Arrows bend when released. If the bend hits the bowstave, the arrow's aim will be thrown off. Wooden arrows have a preferred bending-plane. Synthetic arrows have a designed bending plane. Usually this plane is determined by the grain of the wood of the arrow, or the structure of a synthetic arrow. The nock's slot should be rotated at an angle chosen so that when the arrow bends, it avoids or slides on the bowstave. Almost always this means that the slot of the nock must be perpendicular to the wood's grain, viewed from behind.
Self nocks are slots cut in the back of the arrow. These are simple, but can break at the base of the slot. Self nocks are often reinforced with glued servings of fiber near the base of the slot. The sturdiest nocks are separate pieces made from wood, plastic, or horn that are then attached to the end of the arrow.
Modern nocks, and traditional Turkish nocks, are often constructed so as to curve around the string or even pinch it slightly, so that the arrow is unlikely to slip off.
Ancient Arab archery sometimes used "nockless arrows". In shooting at enemies, Arabs saw them pick up Arab arrows and shoot them back. So Arabs developed bowstrings with a small ring tied where the nock would normally be placed. The rear end of the arrow would be sharpened to a point, rather than slit for a nock. The rear end of the arrow would slip into the ring. The arrow could be drawn and released as usual. Then the enemy could collect the arrows, yet not shoot them back with a conventional bow. Also, since there was no nock, the nock could not break, and the arrow was less expensive. A piece of battle advice was to have several rings tied to the bowstring in case one broke. A practical disadvantage compared to a nock would be preserving the optimal rotation of the arrow, so that when it flexes, it does not hit the bowstave. The bend direction of the arrow might have been indicated by its fletching.
Finishes and cresting
Arrows are usually finished so that they are not softened by rain, fog or condensation. Traditional finishes are varnishes or lacquers. Arrows sometimes need to be repaired, so it's important that the paints be compatible with glues used to attach arrowheads, fletchings, and nocks. For this reason, arrows are rarely protected by waxing.
Crests are rings or bands of paint, often brightly colored, applied to arrows on a lathe-like tool called a cresting machine, usually for the purpose of personalization. Like wraps, cresting may also be done to make arrows easier to see.
Symbolism
An arrow symbol (→) is a simple graphical or typographical representation of an arrow, consisting of a triangle or chevron at the end of a straight line. It is used to indicate a direction, such as on signs and as road surface markings.
A symbol often used by aromantic people is arrows or an arrow as the word arrow is a homophone to the shortened word aro used by aromantic people to refer to themselves.
Ancient Indian astronomers often associate the interdependent trigonometrical components with the picture of a bow and arrow, the arrow (utkrama-jyā) equivalent to the present day secant.

Assisted gene flow (AGF) is a conservation management strategy that moves individuals or gametes between populations of plant or animal species within the species's existing range. This strategy responds to the effects of climate change by facilitating adaptation to projected local climate conditions. For example, an AGF management plan may move individuals from a source population (or populations) living in a warm region to a target population in a colder, but rapidly warming region.
Not to be confused with assisted migration, AGF is a strategy focused on gene flow between existing populations rather than an introduction of individuals to new or restored habitat. AGF is also similar to genetic rescue, a conservation technique intended to prevent species extinction; however, AGF emphasizes long-term conservation and has broader applications. For species that experience local adaptation to historical climate conditions and have populations with genetic compatibility, AGF can be an effective climate change mitigation strategy to help maintain genetic fitness in threatened species.
History
Although the term "assisted gene flow" was first used in a published article in 2013 by Aitken & Whitlock, the concept was recognized as early as 1992 by Ledig & Kitzmiller who wrote about reforestation under the threat of climate change. In this publication Ledig & Kitzmiller suggested that planting programs should consider sourcing seed from further south or lower elevations. The term "targeted gene flow" has also been used to describe the movement of individuals with desired genetic traits into target populations as a conservation strategy. Research on AGF as a conservation strategy, including the analysis of trees and shrubs, herbaceous flowers, reef corals, as well as terrestrial animal species, has shown promising results and revealed potential genetic risks.
Applications and benefits
The ultimate benefit of AGF is the protection of species' health and productivity, including economically important and keystone species, to conserve biodiversity in the face of climate change. Threatened species are at risk of maladaptation due to the rate of natural adaptation falling behind the rapid rate of environmental change, which causes loss of ecosystem function as well as the loss of resources and ecosystem services they provide. AGF can help introduce genotypes that are pre-adapted to new local climates or increase the frequency of climate adapted genotypes that already exist within the population, strengthening a species evolutionary potential and persistence through environmental change.
Accelerating gene flow
In stable environmental conditions, natural selection drives adaptation to the local environment; however, as environmental conditions change over time, species can adapt to new conditions by exhibiting natural processes like gene flow. Gene flow is simply the transfer of genes between populations of the same species. Natural gene flow tends to exhibit a leptokurtic distribution, as opposed to a normal distribution, in which more individuals and gametes distribute a shorter distance from the source population than further. As anthropogenic activity continues to increase the rate of climate change, adaptation by way of these natural processes may not be able to keep up. Additionally, habitat fragmentation caused by human development also prevents natural adaptation by inhibiting gene flow. AGF can direct gene flow in a targeted direction at any desired distance, working to overcome these environmental barriers by speeding up the natural adaptive process.
Assisted gene flow vs. genetic rescue
Genetic rescue is a conservation strategy that targets small, isolated populations that have lost significant genetic diversity and are under threat of extinction. Similar to AGF, genetic rescue introduces new individuals into the target population with the goal of restoring genetic diversity and increasing overall fitness. The two methods deviate in their ultimate goal; Genetic rescue attempts to alleviate inbreeding depression to bolster fitness and promote population growth, while AGF is more directional, aiming to promote genetic adaptation to future climate conditions. While genetic rescue may be considered a form of AGF, it is a short-term conservation solution focused on reducing extinction risk in small populations. Genetic rescue efforts tend to source individuals from populations with similar environmental climates as the target population.
AGF focuses on longer term conservation, sourcing individuals from populations that are adapted to different climate conditions that match future conditions facing the target population. AGF has applications to a greater range of potential recipient populations. In small, threatened populations, AGF is identical to genetic rescue, reducing inbreeding depression and increasing genetic diversity. AGF also assists larger or more fit populations, such as foundation species, that have greater evolutionary potential, but may experience increased stress as climates shift faster than natural adaptation can occur.
Assisted gene flow as assisted migration
Assisted migration is another conservation strategy which involves the anthropogenic movement of species to more suitable habitats in response to changing environmental conditions. AGF can be considered a type of assisted migration which focuses on the movement of individuals or populations of a species to areas within its existing range, while assisted migration is broader, including the introduction of a species to a new geographic location beyond its current range. Due to the nature of AGF maintaining the species' existing range, the ecological risks of moving individuals or gametes are much lower than introductions to new areas.
Risks and limitations
Introducing foreign genotypes into a new population always runs the risk of reducing genetic integrity. For AGF, outbreeding depression, or a reduction in the fitness of offspring genotypes relative to parental lineages, is the most significant risk. Outbreeding depression can be caused by negative epistasis, chromosomal incompatibilities, and loss of locally adapted alleles within the recipient population. Results of these incompatibilities can lead to detrimental effects such as phenological mismatch.
For example, research has shown that AGF has the potential to shift the timing of flowering in plants, which poses a threat to plant pollinator relationships. Additionally, while AGF can introduce beneficial alleles, pre-adapted to certain climate conditions, it can also introduce deleterious alleles which are maladapted to other environmental factors. Lastly, AGF risks genetic swamping if the proportion of introduced individuals or the fitness of new individuals is too high. In both AGF and genetic rescue strategies, foreign genotypes could outcompete local genotypes and lead to the loss of unique genetic lineages.
In addition to the limited parameters on the size and current range of the target species, AGF may be difficult to achieve in long lived species. Successful implementation of AGF often takes several generations for beneficial adaptations to accrue and make an impact. This process may be too slow among species with long generation times, an important consideration for applications in forestry.
Another important consideration is the accuracy of projected climate conditions. Climate projections can be uncertain and many variables must be accounted for. While the purpose of AGF is to conserve species threatened by changing climate, offspring still need to be able to establish and survive under typical conditions. Experts recommend that AGF management plans match the environment of source populations with intermediate climate projections to maximize survival.
Identifying source and target populations
A key factor in determining potential source populations for AGF is a strong history of local adaptation to desired climate conditions. For plant species, this can be determined experimentally through transplanting in common gardens or controlled greenhouse experiments and assessing phenotypic trait inheritance. However, indicators of a viable source population are not limited to ecological factors. Genomic analysis can identify adaptive genetic variation and reveal which populations are best adapted to desired conditions, as well as which populations are most at risk. This can be especially helpful when assessing potential AGF strategies for small populations of endangered species.
Genomic offset has become a promising method of genomic analysis that identifies adaptive genetic variation in populations of candidate species for AGF. This method uses a genotype-environment analysis of a population's genomic data to establish a statistical relationship between allele frequencies and environmental factors. This model is then used to measure the mismatch between current genetic composition and the composition needed for adaptation to projected climate conditions. A genomic offset approach called "risk of nonadaptedness" or RONA, which predicts the required allele frequency shift needed in a population to adapt to future environmental conditions, is an analytical tool that has been recommended for use in AGF strategies.
Research examples
Successful AGF
Elkhorn coral (Acropora palmata)
A successful implementation of AGF was accomplished in 2018 on populations of Acropora palmata or elkhorn coral. Gene flow was initiated by in vitro fertilization of freshly collected coral eggs from Curaçao using cryopreserved sperm from Florida, Puerto Rico, and Curaçao. Despite these coral populations being genetically isolated after more than a 95% decline in population, the risk of outbreeding depression in corals is considered low because they have retained high genetic diversity and exhibit an outcrossed population genetic structure. Researchers found that genetically distinct populations of A. palmata could produce a successful population of offspring and that AGF is a viable option for the conservation of endangered coral populations.
Montane cushion plant (Silene ciliata Pourr.)
An example of AGF for a perennial plant species across an elevational gradient was tested by researchers in 2014. Silene ciliata is a perennial flowering plant species that grows in Mediterranean mountain ranges across Southern Europe. Since plant populations grow across steep elevational gradients, plants at lower elevations are projected to experience earlier snowmelt and onset of the summer drought period. Prior experimentation showed that plants from higher elevations flowered earlier when planted at lower elevation, suggesting that AGF from high to low populations may help advance flowering time to increase reproductive success and seedling survival ahead of the drought period. However results from the researchers' ex situ common garden experiment showed the opposite; gene flow from higher elevation populations delayed flowering time. The researchers suggested that because expression of flowering time is polygenic, the gene flow treatments may have led to a disruption of coadapted genes and the unexpected delay was the result of outbreeding depression.
Günther's toadlet (Pseudophryne guentheri)
Researchers in Australia set up a breeding experiment to assess methods of targeted gene flow in crawling frog species Pseudophryne guentheri, commonly known as Günther's toadlet. In 2017, adult frogs were collected in the field while the simulation of gene flow was conducted in a lab setting using in vitro fertilization of egg clutches. The results suggested that the risk of outbreeding depression increased with genetic, geographic and environmental distance between the source populations of breeding individuals.
Genomic offset
Dwarf birch (Betula nana)
Betula nana, or dwarf birch, populations in the UK have experienced accelerated decline due to habitat loss from anthropogenic activity and climate change. While UK populations still retain extant adaptive diversity, habitat fragmentation threatens to restrict gene flow and environmental adaptation. To better inform potential AGF strategies for a dwarf birch conservation program, researchers began a genomic analysis in 2013 searching for associations between allele frequencies and environmental conditions in Scottish populations.
This genomic offset method alongside a model of simulated AGF suggested that the best conservation approach would involve a translocation of individuals with locally adapted genotypes from the center of the species range into populations along the edges. From this genomic analysis, researchers concluded that dwarf birch would also need additional management strategies such as mitigating clearing practices like grazing and burning alongside AGF so that populations could eventually exhibit natural gene flow.
Netleaf oak (Quercus rugosa)
In 2018, researchers published a genomic offset approach to inform potential conservation management for white oak species Quercus rugosa along the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt. To identify potential loci involved in local adaptation, they utilized an FST outlier analysis to show large variations in allele frequency between populations under varying selective pressures. This data were then mapped on a geographic model that showed patterns of adaptive genetic variation and predicted where populations may be at risk.
Results showed a strong east-west genetic gradient following the seasonality of precipitation in the region and suggested that populations in the northeastern region are most likely to be maladapted to future climate conditions. The researchers concluded that management strategies such as AGF could utilize these findings for future conservation efforts.
Forestry
Norway spruce (Picea abies)
In 2018, researchers took advantage of a unique situation in southern Sweden where recent gene flow had occurred in populations of Norway spruce (Picea abies) due to a forest breeding program from the mid-twentieth century. Spruce trees were genetically sequenced to identify traits of both adaptive and economic interest. The results suggested a strong pattern of local adaptation and that trees of southern origin grew faster and taller than those of local origin. The researchers concluded that AGF and genomic selection could alleviate climate stress, while also emphasizing the risk of frost damage in AGF of boreal species due to varied timing of tree development and frost period.

Astrometallurgy is the study of mineral processing and metal extraction from extra-terrestrial resources including the Moon, Mars, asteroids, and other celestial bodies. A specialised form of extractive metallurgy, this discipline is closely linked to space in-situ resource utilisation (ISRU) or space resource utilisation (SRU).
Background
The study of resource extraction in space dates back to the pre-Apollo era, with the majority of focus placed on oxygen extraction for use as a propellant and for life support. The extraction and use of space resources (in space) is justified by the large cost associated with the launch of materials to support missions and eventual bases or habitats. Sourcing materials from sources other than Earth is argued to significantly reduce upmass and mission costs.
Oxygen as a target was quickly followed by research into the use of planetary dirt or 'regolith' being used for construction and manufacturing purposes both in-situ on bodies like the Moon, and also for in-space manufacturing. While earlier research into oxygen extraction from the oxides found in planetary dirt would have resulted the production of metals as a byproduct, the specific targeting of metals as a primary extraction target only originates in the mid to late 2010's.
Etymology
The word 'astrometallurgy' seems to be derived from 'astro-' meaning space or extra-terrestrial, and "metallurgy" meaning the study of metals and metal extraction.
Processes
Many of the processes currently being studied for use in astrometallurgical applications are very similar in concept to their terrestrial counterparts. The significant challenge is the conversion of these existing technologies for use in the harsh environment of space namely: the vacuum or low pressure, low- or micro-gravity conditions, cost of resupply and transport, energy availability, large temperature changes, and need for automation due to the difficulty of human intervention.
Mineral processing
Mineral processing techniques are often used to create a mineral concentrate from an ore prior to metal extraction, this is done to reduce the energy requirements and minimise contaminants in the final metal product.
In the context of astrometallurgy, due to the general lack of available liquid water in space, mineral processing techniques that can operate on a dry raw material are preferred. These processes include electrostatic separation, magnetic separation, and induced gravity separation.
Metal extraction
The extraction of metals from either a raw material, or from a mineral concentrate, is achieved using some mixture of thermal, chemical, and electrical energy to separate out the metal atoms from non-metal material.
Metal extraction processes for use in space that have been lab tested to date include:
Carbothermal reduction
Hydrogen reduction
Molten salt electrolysis
Molten oxide electrolysis
Solid electrolysis
Thermal decomposition
Selective ionisation
Ionic liquid extraction
Metallothermic reduction
Acid reduction
Fluorine reduction
Bio-reduction
Carbochlorination
A more comprehensive list was published by Shaw et al.
Current state of the art
As of Feb 2026, the extraction of metals in an extraterrestrial context has not been demonstrated. However, multiple space agencies and private companies have announced plans and payloads that will aim to demonstrate the ability to extract and use metals in space.

Attic ochre or attic yellow ocher (Latin: Sil atticum) — the historically known variety of ochre, which had a bright lemon yellow color, was considered the best and most expensive type of ochre in Ancient Greece and Rome. Attic ochre was used mainly for high-quality finishing work or decoration of household items. In painting, it was used to depict light, say, in contrast to achian ochre, which was used to paint shadows. This variety was mined in the immediate vicinity of Athens, from the ore veins of the silver mines near Koliada (Cape Koliada, Κωλιάδα άκρα), as well as in the Laurian silver mines.
Attic bright yellow clay was considered to be of particularly high quality; it was homogeneous, had no inclusions, and held the surface perfectly, even to the point of appearing a slight shine when smoothed, which made a favorable impression. Dioscorides in his treatise “On Medicinal Substances” recommended taking Attic ochre for medical use.
History
The peak of Attic ochre production occurred in old Hellenic times. Already by the first century BC, this pigment was considered very rare in Rome, since the veins had been worked out to a large extent in the previous period. Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, in the seventh chapter (″Natural Colors″) of the seventh book of his architectural works, laments that “...the best Attic ochre is no longer available, because when there were slaves in the silver mines in Athens, they dug shafts underground in search of silver. Encountering a vein of ochre there, they tried to mine ochre along with silver; therefore the ancients had at their disposal excellent supplies of ochre for finishing their works.”
Pliny the Elder fully confirms his opinion in Natural History (book thirty-three). “The best ochre is the one called Attic; its price is 2 denarii per pound. The next one is marbled, the price is half that of the Attic one.”
Use
First of all, Attic ochre was used for painting rooms and high-quality finishing works, as well as for decorating ceramics and household items. According to the same Pliny, Greek painters used six types of ochre. The best of them, the so-called Sil atticum, was used for those cases when it was necessary to depict light. It is believed that the introduction of Attic ochre into paintings began quite late, in the 1st century AD. It was first used in their works by the Greek painters Polygnotus and Micon, as well as Apelles, Echion, Melanthius and Nicomachus. They used only four colors (ochres) in their work, one of which was Attic ochre, which depicted light and the light parts of the picture.
The work of Polygnotus, which has been preserved more than others, allows us to judge the range of paints and pigments with which he worked. His palette, however, like other artists of that time, was quite limited. It included white (melinium), yellow (atticum, Attic ochre), red (sinopis pontica) and black (atramentum) paints. Of course, one cannot understand the evidence of antiquity to mean that only four colors are found in the works of Polygnotus. The four pigments mentioned above, when mixed with each other in different proportions, result in more than eight hundred different shades.
To this it should be added that in ancient times ochre remained the only or almost the only yellow pigment available. When composing yellow paint itself, ochre was often mixed with chalk or lime.
The high cost and lack of Attic ochre forced us to look for recipes for simulating its color using artificial means. Thus, in the last, fourteenth chapter of the same book (“Paints replacing crimson, ochre, mountain green and indigo”), Vitruvius describes one of the methods used by house painters to obtain the color of Attic ochre from boiled dried violets and chalk.
Properties
Attic ochre is homogeneous and well-tanned, it has a provocatively bright light yellow color, reminiscent of the solar spectrum or even lighter. It is stable, does not fade in sunlight and does not decompose from exposure to atmospheric factors. However, this type of ochre should not be confused with Attic ceramics proper, which also had a reputation for high quality. Unlike the bright yellow ocher, Attic clay is light orange to reddish brown in color and often contains small mica sparkles.
Of the modern paints that are closer in tone to Attic ochre, one can name, first of all, golden ochre.

An axe (; sometimes spelled ax in American English; see spelling differences) is an implement that has been used for thousands of years to shape, split, and cut wood, to harvest timber, and as a weapon. The axe has many forms and specialised uses but generally consists of a head with a sharpened blade (also called a "bit") attached to a handle (also called "haft" or "helve").
Before the modern axe, the stone-age hand axe without a handle was used from 1.5 million years BP. Hafted axes (those with a handle) date from at least 46,000 years BP by Northern Indigenous Australians. The earliest examples of handled axes have heads of stone with some form of wooden handle attached (hafted) in a method to suit the available materials and use. Axes made of copper, bronze, iron and steel appeared as these technologies developed.
The axe is an example of a simple machine, as it is a type of wedge, or dual inclined plane. This reduces the effort needed by the wood chopper. It cuts and splits the wood into two parts by the pressure concentration at the blade and then the movement of the head in behind the initial cut. The handle of the axe also acts as a lever allowing the user to increase the force at the cutting edge. Generally, the blades of 'cutting axes', which are used for felling, limbing, and bucking, have a shallow (acute) wedge angle, whereas 'splitting axes' have a deeper (more obtuse) angle. Most axes are double bevelled (i.e. symmetrical about the axis of the blade), but some specialist broadaxes have a single bevel blade.
Most modern axes have steel heads and wooden handles, although plastic or fibreglass handles are also common. Modern axes are specialised by use, size and form. Hafted axes with short handles designed for use with one hand are often called "hand axes", but the term "hand axe" can also refer to an axe without a handle. Hatchets tend to be short-, small-hafted axes often with a hammer on the back side (the poll, or butt). Relatively easy to make and use, the axe has frequently been used in combat, and is one of humanity's oldest weapons. Axes are also linchpins to the competitive sport of wood-chopping.
History
Hand axes, of stone, and used without handles (hafts) were the first axes. They had knapped (chipped) cutting edges of flint or other stone. Early examples of hand axes date back to 1.6 mya in the later Oldowan, in Southern Ethiopia around 1.4 mya, and in 1.2 mya deposits in Olduvai Gorge. Stone axes made with ground cutting edges were first developed sometime in the late Pleistocene in Australia, where grind-edge axe fragments from sites in Arnhem Land date back at least 44,000 years; grind-edge axes were later present in Japan some time around 38,000 BP, and are known from several Upper Palaeolithic sites on the islands of Honshu and Kyushu.
Hafted axes are first known from the Mesolithic period (c. 6000 BC). Few wooden hafts have been found from this period, but it seems that the axe was normally hafted by wedging. Birch-tar and rawhide lashings were used to fix the blade.
The distribution of stone axes is an important indication of prehistoric trade. Thin sectioning is used to determine the provenance of the stone blades. In Europe, Neolithic "axe factories", where thousands of ground stone axes were roughed out, are known from many places, such as:
Great Langdale, England (tuff)
Rathlin Island, Ireland (porcellanite)
Krzemionki, Poland (flint)
Neolithic flint mines of Spiennes, Belgium (flint)
Plancher-les-Mines, France (pelite)
Aosta Valley, Italy (omphacite).
Stone axes are still produced and in use today in parts of Papua, Indonesia. The Mount Hagen area of Papua New Guinea was an important production centre.
From the late Neolithic/Chalcolithic onwards, axes were made of copper or copper mixed with arsenic. These axes were flat and hafted much like their stone predecessors. Axes continued to be made in this manner with the introduction of bronze metallurgy. Eventually the hafting method changed and the flat axe developed into the "flanged axe", then palstaves, and later winged and socketed axes.
Symbolism, ritual, and folklore
At least since the late Neolithic, elaborate axes (battle-axes, T-axes, etc.) had a religious significance and probably indicated the exalted status of their owner. Certain types almost never show traces of wear; deposits of unshafted axe blades from the middle Neolithic (such as at the Somerset Levels in Britain) may have been gifts to the deities.
In Minoan Crete, the double axe (labrys) had a special significance, used by priestesses in religious ceremonies.
In 1998, a labrys, complete with an elaborately embellished haft, was found at Cham-Eslen, Canton of Zug, Switzerland. The haft was 120 cm (47 in) long and wrapped in ornamented birch-bark. The axe blade is 17.4 cm (6.9 in) long and made of antigorite, mined in the Gotthard-area. The haft goes through a biconical drilled hole and is fastened by wedges of antler and by birch-tar. It belongs to the early Cortaillod culture.
The coat of arms of Norway features a lion rampant carrying an axe which represents King Olaf II of Norway, who was honoured as the Eternal King of Norway.
In folklore, stone axes were sometimes believed to be thunderbolts and were used to guard buildings against lightning, as it was believed (mythically) that lightning never struck the same place twice. This has caused some skewing of axe distributions.
Steel axes were important in superstition as well. A thrown axe could keep off a hailstorm, sometimes an axe was placed in the crops, with the cutting edge to the skies to protect the harvest against bad weather. An upright axe buried under the sill of a house would keep off witches, while an axe under the bed would assure male offspring.
Basques, Australians and New Zealanders have developed variants of rural sports that perpetuate the traditions of log cutting with axe. The Basque variants, splitting horizontally or vertically disposed logs, are generically called aizkolaritza (from aizkora: axe).
In Yorùbá mythology, the oshe (double-headed axe) symbolises Shango, Orisha (god) of thunder and lightning. It is said to represent swift and balanced justice. Shango altars often contain a carved figure of a woman holding a gift to the god with a double-bladed axe sticking up from her head.
The Hurrian and Hittite weather god Teshub is depicted on a bas-relief at Ivriz wielding a thunderbolt and an axe.
The Arkalochori Axe is a bronze Minoan axe from the second millennium BC thought to be used for religious purposes. Inscriptions on this axe have been compared with other ancient writing systems.
In Mark Masonry, the axe is a symbol of punishment meant to remind Mark Master Masons to be truthful and avoid deceit.
Types
Axes designed to cut or shape wood
Broadaxe: Used with the grain of the wood in precision splitting or "hewing" (i.e. the squaring-off of round timbers usually for use in construction). Broad axe bits are most commonly chisel-shaped (i.e. one flat and one beveled edge) facilitating more controlled work as the flat cheek passes along the squared timber.
Adze: A variation featuring a head perpendicular to that of an axe. Rather than splitting wood side-by-side, it is used to rip a level surface into a horizontal piece of wood. It can also be used as a pickaxe for breaking up rocks and clay.
Hatchet: A small, light axe designed for use in one hand specifically while camping or travelling.
Carpenter's axe: A small axe, usually slightly larger than a hatchet, used in traditional woodwork, joinery and log-building. It has a pronounced beard and finger notch to allow a "choked" grip for precise control. The poll is designed for use as a hammer.
Hand axe: A small axe used for intermediate chopping, similar to hatchets.
Mortising axe: Used for creating mortises, a process which begins by drilling two holes at the ends of the intended mortise. Then the wood between the holes is removed with the mortising axe. Some forms of the tool have one blade, which may be pushed, swung or struck with a mallet. Others, such as twybil, bisaigüe and piochon have two, one of which is used for separating the fibres, and the other for levering out the waste.
Axes as weapons
Battle axe: In its most common form, an arm-length weapon borne in one or both hands. Compared to a sword swing, it delivers more cleaving power against a smaller target area, making it more effective against armour, due to concentrating more of its weight in the axehead.
Dagger-axe (Ji or Ge): A variant of Chinese polearm-like weapon with a divided two-part head, composed of the usual straight blade and a scythe-like blade. The straight blade is used to stab or feint, then the foe's body or head may be cut by pulling the scythe-like horizontal blade backwards. Ge has the horizontal blade but sometimes does not have the straight spear.
Dane axe: a long-handled weapon with a large flat blade, often attributed to the Norsemen.
Halberd: a spear-like weapon with a hooked poll, effective against mounted cavalry.
Head axe: a type of thin-bladed axe with a distinctive shape specialized for headhunting from the Cordilleran peoples of the Philippines.
Hurlbat: An entirely metal throwing axe sharpened on every auxiliary end to a point or blade, practically guaranteeing some form of damage against its target.
Ono: a Japanese weapon wielded by sōhei warrior monks.
Panabas: A chopping bladed tool or weapon from the Philippines often described as a cross between a sword and a battle axe.
Parashu: The parashu (Sanskrit: paraṣu) is an Indian battle-axe. It is generally wielded with two hands but could also be used with only one. It is depicted as the primary weapon of Parashurama, the 6th Avatar of Lord Vishnu in Hinduism.
Poleaxe: designed to defeat plate armour. Its axe (or hammer) head is much narrower than other axes, which accounts for its penetrating power.
Sagaris: An ancient weapon used by Scythians.
Shepherd's axe: used by shepherds in the Carpathian Mountains, it could double as a walking stick.
Throwing axe: A weapon that was thrown and designed to strike with a similar splitting action as its handheld counterparts. These are often small in profile and usable with one hand.
Tomahawk: used almost exclusively by Native Americans, its blade was originally crafted of stone. Along with the familiar war version, which could be fashioned as a throwing weapon, the pipe tomahawk was a ceremonial and diplomatic tool.
Yue: A Chinese weapon with very large axe blade, also served as ceremonial weapon.
Axes as tools
Ice axe or climbing axe: A number of different styles of ice axes are designed for ice climbing and enlarging steps used by climbers.
Mattock: A dual-purpose axe, combining an adze and axe blade, or sometimes a pick and adze blade.
Pickaxe: An axe with a large pointed end, rather than a flat blade. Sometimes exists as a double-bladed tool with a pick on one side and an axe or adze head on the other. Often used to break up hard material.
Pulaski: An axe with a mattock blade built into the rear of the main axe blade, used for digging ('grubbing out') through and around roots as well as chopping.
Splitting maul: A splitting implement that has evolved from the simple "wedge" design to more complex designs.
Axes for sport
Throwing axe: A tool that was thrown and designed to strike wooden targets and stay embedded in the target to score points in sport throwing competitions such as those hosted by the World Axe Throwing League. These can range from axes that are small in profile and usable with one hand, or longer axes thrown with two hands.
Racing axe: A tool designed for competitive wood chopping sports such as the Stihl Timbersports Series.
Hammer axe
Hammer axes (or axe-hammers) typically feature an extended poll, opposite the blade, shaped and sometimes hardened for use as a hammer. The name axe-hammer is often applied to a characteristic shape of perforated stone axe used in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. Iron axe-hammers are found in Roman military contexts, e.g. Cramond, Edinburgh, and South Shields, Tyne and Wear.

Ayudha katti (also written ayda katti or aydha katti or आयुध कटि) is an indigenous weapon of war and tools to the Kodava people of Kodagu, in the state of Karnataka, India. The ayudha katti is developed from an implement used to cut through dense undergrowth. Unlike most blades, the ayudha katti is worn without a sheath.
Origin
The ayudha katti is the traditional sword of the Kodavas The Kodavas inhabit the region of Kodagu in southwestern India in what is now the state of Karnataka. The Kodavas have resided in the area for over 2 millennia cultivating paddy fields, maintaining cattle herds and carrying arms during war. The invention of the ayudha katti probably started around the 17th-century. It was first invented as an implement used to cut through dense undergrowth. The shape of the blade is similar with the Turkish yatagan and northern Indian sosun pattah, which indicates that it is related to the Ancient Greek kopis blade.
During the colonial period, the British named the region "Coorg", a corruption of the Kannada word "kodaga" or "kodagu" meaning "hilly, steep". The word refers to the geographical condition of the region.
Description
The length of the ayudha katti varies greatly. Some ayudha katti can reach up to 50 centimetres (20 in) long. There are two known forms of the ayudha katti. The 'war' form is mainly used for melee combat, and the 'prestige' form is worn for daily use. Unlike the prestige form, the war ayudha katti lacks the egg-shaped pommel plate on the base of the hilt. The ayudha katti is one of the rarest of the edged- weapons.
The blade of the ayudha katti measures about 38 centimetres (15 in) long. The sharpened edge is located on the concave side of the blade. The top (the non-sharpened edge) of the sword is initially concave, then it tapers slightly for about a quarter of the length until it becomes extremely convex, and then it tapers quickly until the point. The widest part of the blade reaches 9 centimetres (3.5 in) wide. The overall shape of ayudha katti is short and quite heavy. The shape somehow resembles the moplah sword used by the Muslim population on the Malabar Coast, although unlike the moplah, the ayudha katti is sharpened only on one side and has no medial ridge. Ayudha katti is mostly a chopping tool, a very common weapon found worldwide. It was used for clearing the forest, as an agricultural tool, as well as melee weapon in war.
The hilt of the ayudha katti can be made of wood or horn (usually of the water buffalo). The pommel is a plate with the shape if an egg and is made of same material as the hilt. The hilt is often decorated with traditional geometric or floral carvings.
The ayudha katti is peculiarly worn without a scabbard. It is typically held in the hand while sitting. The prestige form ayudha katti has a special carrying device consisting of a silver chain that serves as a belt and a large brass ring for hanging the knife in the back of the blade's holder.

A backsaw is any hand saw which has a stiffening rib on the edge opposite the cutting edge, enabling better control and more precise cutting than with other types of saws. Backsaws are normally used in woodworking for precise work, such as cutting dovetails, mitres, or tenons in cabinetry and joinery. Because of the stiffening rib, backsaws are limited in the depth to which they can cut. Backsaws usually have relatively closely spaced teeth, often with little or no set.
Types of backsaws
Backsaws include the tenon saw, the dovetail saw, and the (United Kingdom) sash saw1. Tenon and dovetail saws usually have a pistol grip style handle which may be open or closed at the bottom.
Different types of backsaw include:
Mitre saw – often referred to as a large backsaw (20–30 inches or 60–90 cm) used either in a wooden or metal mitre box or in a metal frame which allowed cutting mitres of any specified angle. Note that not all mitre saws are backsaws, and the electric mitre saw (or chop saw) has largely taken its place today.
Tenon saw – a midsized backsaw. The saw derives its name from its use in the cutting of tenons for mortise and tenon joinery. Tenon saws are commonly available with rip-filed teeth for rip cutting and cross-cut for cutting across the grain. Teeth are relatively fine, with 13 teeth per inch being a common size for the saw.
Sash saw – name that seems to have been used in the 18th and 19th century for a smaller tenon saw, used in fabricating window sashes. The term is also used currently to refer to a thin, flexible saw used to free sashes that have been painted shut.
Carcass saw – an in-between of a tenon saw and a dovetail saw.
Dovetail saw – a small backsaw used to cut dovetails. These saws will usually have a higher number of teeth per inch (around 15 - 20 T.P.I.) with teeth sharpened in a rip tooth pattern and minimal set to leave a narrow kerf. This fine rip tooth pattern also works well in cross cutting operations.
Gent's saw or Gentleman's saw (rare) – a small dovetail saw with a straight turned handle, rather than an open one typical of most saws. The name seems to have arisen from its use by the nineteenth century dilettante who would now be called a hobbyist but it is hard to find a nineteenth century reference to it. For example, in the section on tools in Every Man his own Mechanic (1881) (816pp), tenon, dovetail and sash saws are listed as a group but there is no mention of a gent's saw. It is adapted for use in making joints in very small woodwork such as that in some musical instruments, dolls' furniture or other model-making. Its distinguishing features are its small size and turned handle.
Razor saw – a very small backsaw having very finely pitched crosscut teeth, often with no set. The Razor saw is used by hobbyists, notably model aircraft, boat, and railroad enthusiasts. Razor saws typically use disposable blades (or are occasionally designed to be completely disposable), since their teeth are so small as to be impractical to re-sharpen. A razor saw is capable of making clean cuts in very soft woods like Balsa, which most other saws would tend to tear out. Unlike most other types of backsaws, razor saws are also frequently used to cut plastics and soft metals.
Dōzuki – a Japanese backsaw, used for centuries by carpenters and cabinetmakers in Japan. Although this saw does not share an ancestry with the other backsaws in this group, the concept is the same. Like most Japanese saws, the dōzuki cuts on the pull stroke, allowing much straighter and narrower cuts than those achieved with push-stroke saws. This is due to tension on the blade during the cut (versus compression for a western saw), so less thickness is required to keep the saw blade straight.
Design
The work of a backsaw requires a thin, stiff blade. These two immediately incompatible requirements are resolved by swaging (and perhaps, spot welding) a stiffening cap over the length of the top edge of the blade. This thickening of the blade is the back and is generally made from some kind of metal, usually brass or steel. The stiffening back is carried through into the handle so that the blade does not bend between the two. The thickening of the back limits the depth to which the saw can cut but this is generally not a limitation in their typical uses.
Associated tools
A backsaw is often used in combination with a mitre box to produce precisely angled cuts.
Another accessory commonly used is the bench hook.
Another tool associated with the use of backsaws is the marking knife. This leaves a cleaner line than a pencil would and it cuts the fibres at the surface of the wood. Without this, the action of the saw would lift them and leave a ragged edge.

Bainite is a plate-like microstructure that forms in steels at temperatures of 125–550 °C (depending on alloy content). First described by E. S. Davenport and Edgar Bain, it is one of the products that may form when austenite (the face-centered cubic crystal structure of iron) is cooled past a temperature where it is no longer thermodynamically stable with respect to ferrite, cementite, or ferrite and cementite. Davenport and Bain originally described the microstructure as similar in appearance to tempered martensite.
A fine non-lamellar structure, bainite commonly consists of cementite and dislocation-rich ferrite. The large density of dislocations in the ferrite present in bainite, and the fine size of the bainite platelets, makes this ferrite harder than it normally would be.
The temperature range for transformation of austenite to bainite (125–550 °C) is between those for pearlite and martensite. In fact, there is no fundamental lower limit to the bainite-start temperature. When formed during continuous cooling, the cooling rate to form bainite is more rapid than that required to form pearlite, but less rapid than is required to form martensite (in steels of the same composition). Most alloying elements will retard the formation of bainite, though carbon is the most effective in doing so. Aluminium or cobalt are exceptions in that they can accelerate the decomposition of austenite and raise the transformation temperature.
The microstructures of martensite and bainite at first seem quite similar, consisting of thin plates which in low-alloy steels cluster together. This is a consequence of the two microstructures sharing many aspects of their transformation mechanisms. However, morphological differences do exist that require a transmission electron microscope to see. Under a light microscope, the microstructure of bainite appears darker than untempered martensite because the bainite has more substructure.
The hardness of bainite can be between that of pearlite and untempered martensite in the same steel hardness. The fact that it can be produced during both isothermal or continuous cooling is a big advantage, because this facilitates the production of large components without excessive additions of alloying elements. Unlike martensitic steels, alloys based on bainite often do not need further heat treatment after transformation in order to optimise strength and toughness.
History
In the 1920s Davenport and Bain discovered a new steel microstructure that they provisionally called martensite-troostite, because it is intermediate between the known low-temperature martensite phase and what was then known as troostite (later fine-pearlite). This microstructure was subsequently named bainite by Bain's colleagues at the United States Steel Corporation, although it took some time for the name to be taken up by the scientific community with books as late as 1947 failing to mention bainite by name.
Bain and Davenport also noted the existence of two distinct forms: 'upper-range' bainite which formed at higher temperatures and 'lower-range' bainite which formed near the martensite start temperature (these forms are now known as upper- and lower-bainite respectively). The early terminology was further confused by the overlap, in some alloys, of the lower-range of the pearlite reaction and the upper-range of the bainite with the additional possibility of proeutectoid ferrite.
Formation
Above approximately 900 °C a typical low-carbon steel is composed entirely of austenite, a high-temperature phase of iron that has a cubic close-packed crystal structure. On cooling, it tends to transform into a mixture of phases, ferrite and cementite, depending on the exact chemical composition. A steel of eutectoid composition will under equilibrium conditions transform into pearlite – an interleaved mixture of ferrite and cementite (Fe3C). In addition to the thermodynamic considerations indicated by the phase diagram, the phase transformations in steel are heavily influenced by the chemical kinetics. This is because the diffusion of iron atoms becomes difficult below about 600 °C under typical processing conditions. As a consequence, a complex array of microstructures occurs when the atomic mobility is limited. This leads to the complexity of steel microstructures which are strongly influenced by the cooling rate. This can be illustrated by a continuous cooling transformation (CCT) diagram which plots the time required to form a phase when a sample is cooled at a specific rate thus showing regions in time-temperature space from which the expected phase fractions can be deduced for a given thermal cycle.
If the steel is cooled slowly or isothermally transformed at elevated temperatures, the microstructure obtained will be closer to equilibrium, containing for example of allotriomorphic ferrite, cementite and pearlite. However, the transformation from austenite to pearlite is a time-dependent reconstructive reaction which requires the large scale movement of the iron and carbon atoms. While the interstitial carbon diffuses readily even at moderate temperatures the self-diffusion of iron becomes extremely slow at temperatures below 600 °C until, for all practical purposes, it stops. As a consequence, a rapidly cooled steel may reach a temperature where pearlite can no longer form even though the reaction is incomplete and the remaining austenite is thermodynamically unstable.
Austenite that is cooled sufficiently rapidly to avoid higher temperature transformations, can form martensite, without any diffusion of either iron or carbon, by the deformation of the austenite's face-centred crystal structure into a distorted body-centred tetragonal or body-centred cubic structure. This non-equilibrium phase can only form at low temperatures, where the driving force for the reaction is sufficient to overcome the considerable lattice strain imposed by the transformation. The transformation is essentially time-independent with the phase fraction depending only the degree of cooling below the critical martensite start temperature. Further, it occurs without the diffusion of either substitutional or interstitial atoms and so martensite inherits the composition of the parent austenite.
Bainite occupies a region between these two process in a temperature range where iron self-diffusion is limited but there is insufficient driving force to form martensite. The bainite, like martensite, grows without diffusion but some of the carbon then partitions into any residual austenite, or precipitates as cementite. A further distinction is often made between so-called lower-bainite, which forms at temperatures closer to the martensite start temperature, and upper-bainite which forms at higher temperatures. This distinction arises from the diffusion rates of carbon at the temperature at which the bainite is forming. If the temperature is high then the carbon will diffuse rapidly away from the newly formed ferrite and form carbides in the carbon-enriched residual austenite between the ferritic plates leaving them carbide-free. At low temperatures the carbon will diffuse more sluggishly and may precipitate before it can leave the bainitic ferrite. There is some controversy over the specifics of bainite's transformation mechanism; both theories are represented below.
Displacive theory
One of the theories on the specific formation mechanism for bainite is that it occurs by a shear transformation, as in martensite. The crystal structure change is achieved by a deformation rather than by diffusion. The shape change associated with bainite is an invariant—plane strain with a large shear component. This kind of deformation implies a disciplined motion of atoms (rather than a chaotic transfer associated with diffusion), and is typical of all displacive transformations in steels, for example, martensite, bainite and Widmanstaetten ferrite. There is a strain energy associated with such relief, that leads to the plate shape of the transformation product Any diffusion is subsequent to the diffusionless transformation of austenite, for example the partitioning of carbon from supersaturated bainitic ferrite, or the precipitation of carbides; this is analogous to the tempering of martensite.
There are many features of bainite that are correctly predicted by this theory, including:
the plate shape, which is a consequence of the minimisation of strain energy due to the shape deformation accompanying transformation.
The fact that excess carbon is retained inside the even defect-free regions of bainitic ferrite.
The fact that the unit cell of bainitic ferrite can be tetragonal rather than cubic.
The fact that the bainite transformation can be dramatically retarded when the austenite is first plastically deformed, a phenomenon known as mechanical stabilisation, which is unique to displacive transformations.
The obvious fact that displacements occur when bainite grows. The transformation is a combination of deformation and crystal structure change, just like martensite.
Diffusive theory
The diffusive theory of bainite's transformation process is based on the assumption that a bainitic ferrite plate grows with a similar mechanism as Widmanstätten ferrite at higher temperatures. Its growth rate thus depends on how rapidly carbon can diffuse from the growing ferrite into the austenite. A common misconception is that this mechanism excludes the possibility of coherent interfaces and a surface relief. In fact it is accepted by some that formation of Widmanstätten ferrite is controlled by carbon diffusion and do show a similar surface relief.
Morphology
Typically bainite manifests as aggregates, termed sheaves, of ferrite plates (sub-units) separated by retained austenite, martensite or cementite. While the sub-units appear separate when viewed on a 2-dimensional section they are in fact interconnected in 3-dimensions and usually take on a lenticular plate or lath morphology. The sheaves themselves are wedge-shaped with the thicker end associated with the nucleation site.
The thickness of the ferritic plates is found to increase with the transformation temperature. Neural network models have indicated that this is not a direct effect of the temperature per se but rather a result of the temperature dependence of the driving force for the reaction and the strength of the austenite surrounding the plates. At higher temperatures, and hence lower undercooling, the reduced thermodynamic driving force causes a decrease in the nucleation rate which allows individual plates to grow larger before they physically impinge on each other. Further, the growth of the plates must be accommodated by plastic flow in the surrounding austenite which is difficult if the austenite is strong and resists the plate's growth.
Upper bainite
"Upper bainite" forms around 400–550 °C in sheaves. These sheaves contain several laths of ferrite that are approximately parallel to each other and which exhibit a Kurdjumov-Sachs relationship with the surrounding austenite, though this relationship degrades as the transformation temperature is lowered. The ferrite in these sheaves has a carbon concentration below 0.03%, resulting in carbon-rich austenite around the laths.
The amount of cementite that forms between the laths is based on the carbon content of the steel. For a low carbon steel, typically discontinuous "stringers" or small particles of cementite will be present between laths. For steel with a higher carbon content, the stringers become continuous along the length of the adjacent laths.
Lower bainite
Lower bainite forms between 250 and 400 °C and takes a more plate-like form than upper bainite. There are not nearly as many low angle boundaries between laths in lower bainite. In lower bainite, the habit plane in ferrite will also shift from <111> towards <110> as transformation temperature decreases. In lower bainite, cementite nucleates on the interface between ferrite and austenite.
Incomplete transformation
In the present context, "incomplete transformation" refers to the fact that in the absence of carbide precipitation, the bainite reaction stops well before the austenite reaches its equilibrium or paraequilibrium chemical composition. It stops at the point where the free energies of austenite and ferrite of identical composition become the same, i.e. transformation without a change in chemical composition of the participating phases becomes thermodynamically impossible.
Early research on bainite found that at a given temperature only a certain volume fraction of the austenite would transform to bainite with the remainder decomposing to pearlite after an extended delay. This was the case despite the fact that a complete austenite to pearlite transformation could be achieved at higher temperatures where the austenite was more stable. The fraction of bainite that could form increased as the temperature decreased. This was ultimately explained by accounting for the fact that when the bainitic ferrite formed the supersaturated carbon would be expelled to the surrounding austenite thus thermodynamically stabilising it against further transformation.
Difference between martensite and bainite
Bainite can essentially be regarded as martensite that tempers during the course of transformation. It forms at a higher temperature than martensite, and even the latter can autotemper. Because the transformation temperature is higher, the austenite itself is mechanically weak so that the shape deformation due to bainite is relaxed by the plastic deformation of the adjacent austenite. As a consequence, the growing plate of bainite is confronted by a forest of dislocations that eventually terminates its growth even before the plate has hit an austenite grain boundary. Plates of bainite can therefore be smaller than those of martensite in the same steel. The transformation then proceeds by a sub-unit mechanism involving the successive nucleation of new plates.
Applications
With increasing bainite content in steel, the hardness, yield and tensile strength remain almost constant for bainite content up to 50%, and then increase by ca. 30%. Hence meter-size shafts and plates of high-bainite steels have been commercially mass-produced by Rolls-Royce Holdings and Tata Steel.
In the railway industry, bainite steel is commonly alloyed with vanadium to produce rails of very high strength, with good wear and rolling contact fatigue resistance. Bainite rails fabricated by Corus were installed in the Channel Tunnel in 2006, and after 3 years showed no evidence of the cracks found in standard rails of the same age.

Balbach Smelting & Refining Company (also known as Balbach and Sons Refining and Smelting Company) was a smelting plant in Newark, New Jersey operating in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It was the first commercial electrolytic refinery in the United States, and until its closure in the 1920s, it was the second largest metal processing enterprise in the United States.
History
The company president was Edward Balbach Jr., a metallurgist born in 1839 in Karlsruhe, Baden, Germany. He came to the United States in 1848 with his father Edward Balbach Sr. (1804–1890), who started the Balbach family fortune by collecting gold and silver dust from Newark jewelry shop floors, turning it into bullion. Balbach Sr. first came up with the idea of refining precious metals in Germany, but due to competition there decided to start a business in America. After visiting a number of cities he settled on Newark to start the new venture. In 1865, Edward Balbach Jr. patented the "Balbach Process" which separated gold and silver from lead, which in 1872 evolved into something closely resembling the Parkes process, which had been developed earlier (1850) in England. In 1881, the Balbachs began to manufacture copper, just in time for a boom in demand thanks to the invention of the telephone and shortly thereafter electricity. In 1883, the factory opened an electrolytic refinery for copper, the first electrolytic refinery in the United States. In December 1910, Edward Balbach Jr. died at the age of 72 and control of the company passed to his daughter Julia's husband Edward Randolph (1870–1919) who had been working there since 1898. In 1919, Edward Randolph died and in the 1920s the Balbach operation was closed by its directors in favor of facilities closer to where the ore was mined. The County purchased the factory and converted it to a baseball field, located at Riverbank Park.
Factory conditions were difficult. In the 1880s, workers earned $1.50 to $1.65 a day. (worth $54 to $59 today). It could also be dangerous, if water seeped into a boiler it turned to steam and could cause an explosion, spraying molten metal onto workers who, if not immobilized, were known to run into the Passaic River. The accidents were not limited to workers - in January 1881 a boiler exploded causing a flying brick to strike a sleeping guest in the head through a third floor window at the nearby Balbach family mansion.

Ball clays are kaolinitic sedimentary clays that commonly consist of 20–80% kaolinite, 10–25% mica and 6–65% quartz, along with small amounts of organic matter (such as lignite) and trace amounts of other minerals such as pyrite and siderite.
They are a common raw material for various types of ceramics, where their primary roles are to impart unfired strength, plasticity or to aid rheological stability during the shaping processes. Most ball clays impart colours ranging from buff to cream to off-white when fired in an oxidising atmosphere.
The name "ball clay" is derived from the form of the extracted material when dug by spade as cubes, which then became rounded during subsequent transport, in Dorset and Devon, England during the early days of the industry during the 18th century.
In 2008, UK production of ball clay was reported to be worth £82 million, with sanitaryware manufacturers being the largest single group of end users, representing 40% by volume.
Locations
Deposits are relatively scarce due to the combination of geological factors needed for their formation and preservation. Commercial extraction of ball clays is undertaken across the world, including:
Argentina (San Julian area of Patagonia)
Brazil (various locations including the region around São Paulo – São Simão, Suzano and Ribeirão Pire)
China (various including Guangdong Province)
Czech Republic (Cheb, Plzeň, Prague, Most, S. Bohemia and W. Moravia)
Germany (various locations but the main is the Westerwald region)
Indonesia (various locations including the island of Kalimantan)
Thailand (Lampang)
United Kingdom (the Bovey Basin of south Devon, the Petrockstow Basin in north Devon and the area around Wareham in south-east Dorset)
USA (Kentucky, Tennessee and Texas)
Production output
Global production of ball clay by country for 2002–2003 was estimated to be:
Typical properties
Some selected typical properties of various UK ball clays are:
History in the UK
The ceramic use of ball clays in Britain dates back to at least the Roman era. More recent trade began when a clay was needed to make tobacco pipes in the 16th and 17th century. In 1771 Josiah Wedgwood signed a contract for 1,400 tons a year of ball clay with Thomas Hyde of Purbeck, enabling the production of thinner-walled ceramics.

Baltimore Chrome Works was a chromium ore refinery with its headquarters and main factory located at Fells Point, Baltimore, USA. Isaac Tyson started mining chromite in the area around Baltimore in 1813 and built the Baltimore Chrome Works at Fells Point in 1845. The works became part of Mutual Chemical Company in 1908, and merged into Allied Chemical in 1954. The plant, which was rebuilt in 1951, employed 375 people at peak production.
The factory at Fells Point operated until 1985, when it was closed down. The company had contaminated the 20 acres (81,000 m2) site with hazardous waste, and Honeywell, the successor to Allied Chemical, was ordered by the Environmental Protection Agency to perform a cleanup in the 1986. The order was confirmed by a judicial consent decree in 1989. Honeywell completed the remediation in 1999.

Banded iron formations (BIFs; also called banded ironstone formations) are distinctive units of sedimentary rock consisting of alternating layers of iron oxides and iron-poor chert. They can be up to several hundred meters in thickness and extend laterally for several hundred kilometers. Almost all of these formations are of Precambrian age and are theorized to record the oxygenation of the Earth's oceans. Some of the Earth's oldest rock formations, which formed about 3,700 million years ago (Ma), are associated with banded iron formations.
Banded iron formations are theorized to have formed in sea water as the result of oxygen production by photosynthetic cyanobacteria. The oxygen combined with dissolved iron in Earth's oceans to form insoluble iron oxides, which precipitated out, forming a thin layer on the ocean floor. Each band is similar to a varve, resulting from cyclic variations in oxygen production.
Banded iron formations were first discovered in northern Michigan in 1844. Banded iron formations account for more than 60% of global iron reserves and provide most of the iron ore presently mined. Most formations can be found in Australia, Brazil, Canada, India, Russia, South Africa, Ukraine, and the United States.
Description
A typical banded iron formation consists of repeated, thin layers (a few millimeters to a few centimeters in thickness) of silver to black iron oxides, either magnetite (Fe3O4) or hematite (Fe2O3), alternating with bands of iron-poor chert, often red in color, of similar thickness. A single banded iron formation can be up to several hundred meters in thickness and extend laterally for several hundred kilometers.
Banded iron formation is more precisely defined as chemically precipitated sedimentary rock containing greater than 15% iron. However, most BIFs have a higher content of iron, typically around 30% by mass, so that roughly half the rock is iron oxides and the other half is silica. The iron in BIFs is divided roughly equally between the more oxidized ferric form, Fe(III), and the more reduced ferrous form, Fe(II), so that the ratio Fe(III)/Fe(II+III) typically varies from 0.3 to 0.6. This indicates a predominance of magnetite, in which the ratio is 0.67, over hematite, for which the ratio is 1. In addition to the iron oxides (hematite and magnetite), the iron sediment may contain the iron-rich carbonates siderite and ankerite, or the iron-rich silicates minnesotaite and greenalite. Most BIFs are chemically simple, containing little but iron oxides, silica, and minor carbonate, though some contain significant calcium and magnesium, up to 9% and 6.7% as oxides respectively.
When used in the singular, the term banded iron formation refers to the sedimentary lithology just described. The plural form, banded iron formations, is used informally to refer to stratigraphic units that consist primarily of banded iron formation.
A well-preserved banded iron formation typically consists of macrobands several meters thick that are separated by thin shale beds. The macrobands in turn are composed of characteristic alternating layers of chert and iron oxides, called mesobands, that are several millimeters to a few centimeters thick. Many of the chert mesobands contain microbands of iron oxides that are less than a millimeter thick, while the iron mesobands are relatively featureless. BIFs tend to be extremely hard, tough, and dense, making them highly resistant to erosion, and they show fine details of stratification over great distances, suggesting they were deposited in a very low-energy environment; that is, in relatively deep water, undisturbed by wave motion or currents. BIFs only rarely interfinger with other rock types, tending to form sharply bounded discrete units that never grade laterally into other rock types.
Banded iron formations of the Great Lakes region and the Frere Formation of western Australia are somewhat different in character and are sometimes described as granular iron formations or GIFs. Their iron sediments are granular to oolitic in character, forming discrete grains about a millimeter in diameter, and they lack microbanding in their chert mesobands. They also show more irregular mesobanding, with indications of ripples and other sedimentary structures, and their mesobands cannot be traced out any great distance. Though they form well-defined, discrete units, these are commonly interbedded with coarse to medium-grained epiclastic sediments (sediments formed by weathering of rock). These features suggest a higher energy depositional environment, in shallower water disturbed by wave motions. However, they otherwise resemble other banded iron formations.
The great majority of banded iron formations are Archean or Paleoproterozoic in age. However, a small number of BIFs are Neoproterozoic in age, and are frequently, if not universally, associated with glacial deposits, often containing glacial dropstones. They also tend to show a higher level of oxidation, with hematite prevailing over magnetite, and they typically contain a small amount of phosphate, about 1% by mass. Mesobanding is often poor to nonexistent and soft-sediment deformation structures are common. This suggests very rapid deposition. However, like the granular iron formations of the Great Lakes, the Neoproterozoic occurrences are widely described as banded iron formations.
Banded iron formations are distinct from most Phanerozoic ironstones. Ironstones are relatively rare and are thought to have been deposited in marine anoxic events, in which the depositional basin became depleted in free oxygen. They are composed of iron silicates and oxides without appreciable chert but with significant phosphorus content, which is lacking in BIFs.
No classification scheme for banded iron formations has gained complete acceptance. In 1954, Harold Lloyd James advocated a classification based on four lithological facies (oxide, carbonate, silicate, and sulfide) assumed to represent different depths of deposition, but this speculative model did not hold up. In 1980, Gordon A. Gross advocated a twofold division of BIFs into an Algoma type and a Lake Superior type, based on the character of the depositional basin. Algoma BIFs are found in relatively small basins in association with greywackes and other volcanic rocks and are assumed to be associated with volcanic centers. Lake Superior BIFs are found in larger basins in association with black shales, quartzites, and dolomites, with relatively minor tuffs or other volcanic rocks, and are assumed to have formed on a continental shelf. This classification has been more widely accepted, but the failure to appreciate that it is strictly based on the characteristics of the depositional basin and not the lithology of the BIF itself has led to confusion, and some geologists have advocated for its abandonment. However, the classification into Algoma versus Lake Superior types continues to be used.
Occurrence
Banded iron formations are almost exclusively Precambrian in age, with most deposits dating to the late Archean (2800–2500 Ma) with a secondary peak of deposition in the Orosirian period of the Paleoproterozoic (1850 Ma). Minor amounts were deposited in the early Archean and in the Neoproterozoic (750 Ma). The youngest known banded iron formation is an Early Cambrian formation in western China. Because the processes by which BIFs are formed appear to be restricted to early geologic time, and may reflect unique conditions of the Precambrian world, they have been intensively studied by geologists.
Banded iron formations are found worldwide, in every continental shield of every continent. The oldest BIFs are associated with greenstone belts and include the BIFs of the Isua Greenstone Belt, the oldest known, which have an estimated age of 3700 to 3800 Ma. The Temagami banded iron deposits formed over a 50-million-year period, from 2736 to 2687 Ma, and reached a thickness of 60 meters (200 feet). Other examples of early Archean BIFs are found in the Abitibi greenstone belts, the greenstone belts of the Yilgarn and Pilbara cratons, the Baltic shield, and the cratons of the Amazon, north China, and south and west Africa.
The most extensive banded iron formations belong to what A.F. Trendall calls the Great Gondwana BIFs. These are late Archean in age and are not associated with greenstone belts. They are relatively undeformed and form extensive topographic plateaus, such as the Hamersley Range. The banded iron formations here were deposited from 2470 to 2450 Ma and are the thickest and most extensive in the world, with a maximum thickness in excess of 900 meters (3,000 feet). Similar BIFs are found in the Carajás Formation of the Amazon craton, the Cauê Itabirite of the São Francisco craton, the Kuruman Iron Formation and Penge Iron Formation of South Africa, and the Mulaingiri Formation of India.
Paleoproterozoic banded iron formations are found in the Iron Range and other parts of the Canadian Shield. The Iron Range is a group of four major deposits: the Mesabi Range, the Vermilion Range, the Gunflint Range, and the Cuyuna Range. All are part of the Animikie Group and were deposited between 2500 and 1800 Ma. These BIFs are predominantly granular iron formations.
Neoproterozoic banded iron formations include the Urucum in Brazil, Rapitan in the Yukon, and the Damara Belt in southern Africa. They are relatively limited in size, with horizontal extents not more than a few tens of kilometers and thicknesses not more than about 10 meters (33 feet). These are widely thought to have been deposited under unusual anoxic oceanic conditions associated with the "Snowball Earth."
Origins
Banded iron formation provided some of the first evidence for the timing of the Great Oxidation Event, 2,400 Ma. With his 1968 paper on the early atmosphere and oceans of the Earth, Preston Cloud established the general framework that has been widely, if not universally, accepted for understanding the deposition of BIFs.
Cloud postulated that banded iron formations were a consequence of anoxic, iron-rich waters from the deep ocean welling up into a photic zone inhabited by cyanobacteria that had evolved the capacity to carry out oxygen-producing photosynthesis, but which had not yet evolved enzymes (such as superoxide dismutase) for living in an oxygenated environment. Such organisms would have been protected from their own oxygen waste through its rapid removal via the reservoir of reduced ferrous iron, Fe(II), in the early ocean. The oxygen released by photosynthesis oxidized the Fe(II) to ferric iron, Fe(III), which precipitated out of the sea water as insoluble iron oxides that settled to the ocean floor.
Cloud suggested that banding resulted from fluctuations in the population of cyanobacteria due to free radical damage by oxygen. This also explained the relatively limited extent of early Archean deposits. The great peak in BIF deposition at the end of the Archean was thought to be the result of the evolution of mechanisms for living with oxygen. This ended self-poisoning and produced a population explosion in the cyanobacteria that rapidly depleted the remaining supply of reduced iron and ended most BIF deposition. Oxygen then began to accumulate in the atmosphere.
Some details of Cloud's original model were abandoned. For example, improved dating of Precambrian strata has shown that the late Archean peak of BIF deposition was spread out over tens of millions of years, rather than taking place in a very short interval of time following the evolution of oxygen-coping mechanisms. However, his general concepts continue to shape thinking about the origins of banded iron formations. In particular, the concept of the upwelling of deep ocean water, rich in reduced iron, into an oxygenated surface layer poor in iron remains a key element of most theories of deposition.
The few formations deposited after 1,800 Ma may point to intermittent low levels of free atmospheric oxygen, while the small peak at 750 million years ago may be associated with the hypothetical Snowball Earth.
Formation processes
The microbands within chert layers are most likely varves produced by annual variations in oxygen production. Diurnal microbanding would require a very high rate of deposition of 2 meters per year or 5 km/Ma. Estimates of deposition rate based on various models of deposition and sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP) estimates of the age of associated tuff beds suggest a deposition rate in typical BIFs of 19 to 270 m/Ma, which are consistent either with annual varves or rhythmites produced by tidal cycles.
Preston Cloud proposed that mesobanding was a result of self-poisoning by early cyanobacteria as the supply of reduced iron was periodically depleted. Mesobanding has also been interpreted as a secondary structure, not present in the sediments as originally laid down, but produced during compaction of the sediments. Another theory is that mesobands are primary structures resulting from pulses of activity along mid-ocean ridges that change the availability of reduced iron on time scales of decades. In the case of granular iron formations, the mesobands are attributed to winnowing of sediments in shallow water, in which wave action tended to segregate particles of different size and composition.
For banded iron formations to be deposited, several preconditions must be met.
The deposition basin must contain waters that are ferruginous (rich in iron).
This implies they are also anoxic, since ferrous iron oxidizes to ferric iron within hours or days in the presence of dissolved oxygen. This would prevent transport of large quantities of iron from its sources to the deposition basin.
The waters must not be euxinic (rich in hydrogen sulfide), since this would cause the ferrous iron to precipitate out as pyrite.
There must be an oxidation mechanism active within the depositional basin that steadily converts the reservoir of ferrous iron to ferric iron.
Source of reduced iron
There must be an ample source of reduced iron that can circulate freely into the deposition basin. Plausible sources of iron include hydrothermal vents along mid-ocean ridges, windblown dust, rivers, glacial ice, and seepage from continental margins.
The importance of various sources of reduced iron has likely changed dramatically across geologic time. This is reflected in the division of BIFs into Algoma and Lake Superior-type deposits. Algoma-type BIFs formed primarily in the Archean. These older BIFs tend to show a positive europium anomaly consistent with a hydrothermal source of iron. By contrast, Lake Superior-type banded iron formations primarily formed during the Paleoproterozoic era, and lack the europium anomalies of the older Algoma-type BIFs, suggesting a much greater input of iron weathered from continents.
Absence of oxygen or hydrogen sulfide
The absence of hydrogen sulfide in anoxic ocean water can be explained either by reduced sulfur flux into the deep ocean or a lack of dissimilatory sulfate reduction (DSR), the process by which microorganisms use sulfate in place of oxygen for respiration. The product of DSR is hydrogen sulfide, which readily precipitates iron out of solution as pyrite.
The requirement of an anoxic, but not euxinic, deep ocean for deposition of banded iron formation suggests two models to explain the end of BIF deposition 1.8 billion years ago. The "Holland ocean" model proposes that the deep ocean became sufficiently oxygenated at that time to end transport of reduced iron. Heinrich Holland argues that the absence of manganese deposits during the pause between Paleoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic BIFs is evidence that the deep ocean had become at least slightly oxygenated. The "Canfield ocean" model proposes that, to the contrary, the deep ocean became euxinic and transport of reduced iron was blocked by precipitation as pyrite.
Banded iron formations in northern Minnesota are overlain by a thick layer of ejecta from the Sudbury Basin impact. An asteroid (estimated at 10 km (6.2 mi) across) impacted into waters about 1,000 m (3,300 ft) deep 1.849 billion years ago, coincident with the pause in BIF deposition. Computer models suggest that the impact would have generated a tsunami at least 1,000 m (3,300 ft) high at the point of impact, and 100 m (330 ft) high about 3,000 km (1,900 mi) away. It has been suggested that the immense waves and large underwater landslides triggered by the impact caused the mixing of a previously stratified ocean, oxygenated the deep ocean, and ended BIF deposition shortly after the impact.
Oxidation
Although Cloud argued that microbial activity was a key process in the deposition of banded iron formation, the role of oxygenic versus anoxygenic photosynthesis continues to be debated, and nonbiogenic processes have also been proposed.
Oxygenic photosynthesis
Cloud's original hypothesis was that ferrous iron was oxidized in a straightforward manner by molecular oxygen present in the water:
4 Fe2+ + O2 + 10 H2O → 4 Fe(OH)3 + 8 H+
The oxygen comes from the photosynthetic activities of cyanobacteria. Oxidation of ferrous iron may have been hastened by aerobic iron-oxidizing bacteria, which can increase rates of oxidation by a factor of 50 under conditions of low oxygen.
Anoxygenic photosynthesis
Oxygenic photosynthesis is not the only biogenic mechanism for deposition of banded iron formations. Some geochemists have suggested that banded iron formations could form by direct oxidation of iron by microbial anoxygenic phototrophs. The concentrations of phosphorus and trace metals in BIFs are consistent with precipitation through the activities of iron-oxidizing bacteria.
Iron isotope ratios in the oldest banded iron formations (3700-3800 Ma), at Isua, Greenland, are best explained by assuming extremely low oxygen levels (<0.001% of modern O2 levels in the photic zone) and anoxygenic photosynthetic oxidation of Fe(II):
4 Fe2+ + 11 H2O + CO2 + hv → CH2O + 4 Fe(OH)3 + 8 H+
This requires that dissimilatory iron reduction, the biological process in which microorganisms substitute Fe(III) for oxygen in respiration, was not yet widespread. By contrast, Lake Superior-type banded iron formations show iron isotope ratios that suggest that dissimilatory iron reduction expanded greatly during this period.
An alternate route is oxidation by anaerobic denitrifying bacteria. This requires that nitrogen fixation by microorganisms is also active.
10 Fe2+ + 2 NO−3 + 24 H2O → 10 Fe(OH)3 + N2 + 18 H+
Abiogenic mechanisms
The lack of organic carbon in banded iron formation argues against microbial control of BIF deposition. On the other hand, there is fossil evidence for abundant photosynthesizing cyanobacteria at the start of BIF deposition and of hydrocarbon markers in shales within banded iron formation of the Pilbara craton. The carbon that is present in banded iron formations is enriched in the light isotope, 12C, an indicator of a biological origin. If a substantial part of the original iron oxides was in the form of hematite, then any carbon in the sediments might have been oxidized by the decarbonization reaction:
6 Fe2O3 + C ⇌ 4 Fe3O4 + CO2
Trendall and J.G. Blockley proposed, but later rejected, the hypothesis that banded iron formation might be a peculiar kind of Precambrian evaporite. Other proposed abiogenic processes include radiolysis by the radioactive isotope of potassium, 40K, or annual turnover of basin water combined with upwelling of iron-rich water in a stratified ocean.
Another abiogenic mechanism is photochemical oxidation of Fe(II) by sunlight. Laboratory experiments suggest that this could produce a sufficiently high deposition rate under likely conditions of pH and sunlight. However, if the iron came from a shallow hydrothermal source, other laboratory experiments suggest that precipitation of ferrous iron as carbonates or silicates could seriously compete with photooxidation.
Diagenesis
Regardless of the precise mechanism of oxidation, the oxidation of ferrous to ferric iron likely caused the iron to precipitate out as a ferric hydroxide gel. Similarly, the silica component of the banded iron formations likely precipitated as a hydrous silica gel. The conversion of iron hydroxide and silica gels to banded iron formation is an example of diagenesis, the conversion of sediments into solid rock.
There is evidence that banded iron formations formed from sediments with nearly the same chemical composition as is found in the BIFs today. The BIFs of the Hamersley Range show great chemical homogeneity and lateral uniformity, with no indication of any precursor rock that might have been altered to the current composition. This suggests that, other than dehydration and decarbonization of the original ferric hydroxide and silica gels, diagenesis likely left the composition unaltered and consisted of crystallization of the original gels. Decarbonization may account for the lack of carbon and preponderance of magnetite in older banded iron formations. The relatively high content of hematite in Neoproterozoic BIFs suggests they were deposited very quickly and via a process that did not produce great quantities of biomass, so that little carbon was present to reduce hematite to magnetite.
However, it is possible that BIF was altered from carbonate rock or from hydrothermal mud during late stages of diagenesis. A 2018 study found no evidence that magnetite in BIF formed by decarbonization, and suggests that it formed from thermal decomposition of siderite via the reaction
3 FeCO3 + H2O → Fe3O4 + 3 CO2 + H2
The iron may have originally precipitated as greenalite and other iron silicates. Macrobanding is then interpreted as a product of compaction of the original iron silicate mud. This produced siderite-rich bands that served as pathways for fluid flow and formation of magnetite.
Great Oxidation Event
The peak of deposition of banded iron formations in the late Archean, and the end of deposition in the Orosirian, have been interpreted as markers for the Great Oxygenation Event. Prior to 2.45 billion years ago, the high degree of mass-independent fractionation of sulfur (MIF-S) indicates an extremely oxygen-poor atmosphere. The peak of banded iron formation deposition coincides with the disappearance of the MIF-S signal, which is interpreted as the permanent appearance of oxygen in the atmosphere between 2.41 and 2.35 billion years ago. This was accompanied by the development of a stratified ocean with a deep anoxic layer and a shallow oxidized layer. The end of deposition of BIF at 1.85 billion years ago is attributed to the oxidation of the deep ocean.
Snowball Earth hypothesis
Until 1992 it was assumed that the rare, later (younger) banded iron deposits represented unusual conditions where oxygen was depleted locally. Iron-rich waters would then form in isolation and subsequently come into contact with oxygenated water. The Snowball Earth hypothesis provided an alternative explanation for these younger deposits. In a Snowball Earth state the continents, and possibly seas at low latitudes, were subject to a severe ice age circa 750 to 580 Ma that nearly or totally depleted free oxygen. Dissolved iron then accumulated in the oxygen-poor oceans (possibly from seafloor hydrothermal vents). Following the thawing of the Earth, the seas became oxygenated once more causing the precipitation of the iron. Banded iron formations of this period are predominantly associated with the Sturtian glaciation.
An alternative mechanism for banded iron formations in the Snowball Earth era suggests the iron was deposited from metal-rich brines in the vicinity of hydrothermally active rift zones due to glacially-driven thermal overturn. The limited extent of these BIFs compared with the associated glacial deposits, their association with volcanic formations, and variation in thickness and facies favor this hypothesis. Such a mode of formation does not require a global anoxic ocean, but is consistent with either a Snowball Earth or Slushball Earth model.
Economic geology
Banded iron formations provide most of the iron ore presently mined. More than 60% of global iron reserves are in the form of banded iron formation, most of which can be found in Australia, Brazil, Canada, India, Russia, South Africa, Ukraine, and the United States.
Different mining districts coined their own names for BIFs. The term "banded iron formation" was coined in the iron districts of Lake Superior, where the ore deposits of the Mesabi, Marquette, Cuyuna, Gogebic, and Menominee iron ranges were also variously known as "jasper", "jaspilite", "iron-bearing formation", or taconite. Banded iron formations were described as "itabarite" in Brazil, as "ironstone" in South Africa, and as "BHQ" (banded hematite quartzite) in India.
Banded iron formation was first discovered in northern Michigan in 1844, and mining of these deposits prompted the earliest studies of BIFs, such as those of Charles R. Van Hise and Charles Kenneth Leith. Iron mining operations on the Mesabi and Cuyuna Ranges evolved into enormous open pit mines, where steam shovels and other industrial machines could remove massive amounts of ore. Initially the mines exploited large beds of hematite and goethite weathered out of the banded iron formations, and some 2,500,000,000 t (2.5×109 long tons; 2.8×109 short tons) of this "natural ore" had been extracted by 1980. By 1956, large-scale commercial production from the BIF itself began at the Peter Mitchell Mine near Babbitt, Minnesota. Production in Minnesota was 40,000,000 t (39,000,000 long tons; 44,000,000 short tons) of ore concentrate per year in 2016, which is about 75% of total U.S. production. Magnetite-rich banded iron formation, known locally as taconite, is ground to a powder, and the magnetite is separated with powerful magnets and pelletized for shipment and smelting.
Iron ore became a global commodity after the Second World War, and with the end of the embargo against exporting iron ore from Australia in 1960, the Hamersley Range became a major mining district. The banded iron formations here are the thickest and most extensive in the world, originally covering an area of 150,000 square kilometers (58,000 square miles) and containing about 300,000,000,000 t (3.0×1011 long tons; 3.3×1011 short tons) of iron. The range contains 80 percent of all identified iron ore reserves in Australia. Over 100,000,000 t (98,000,000 long tons; 110,000,000 short tons) of iron ore is removed from the range every year.
The Itabarite banded iron formations of Brazil cover at least 80,000 square kilometers (31,000 square miles) and are up to 600 meters (2,000 feet) thick. These form the Quadrilatero Ferrifero or Iron Quadrangle, which resembles the Iron Range mines of United States in that the favored ore is hematite weathered out of the BIFs. Production from the Iron Quadrangle helps make Brazil the second largest producer of iron ore after Australia, with monthly exports averaging 139,299 t (137,099 long tons; 153,551 short tons) from December 2007 to May 2018.
Mining of ore from banded iron formations at Anshan in north China began in 1918. When Japan occupied Northeast China in 1931, these mills were turned into a Japanese-owned monopoly, and the city became a significant strategic industrial hub during the Second World War. Total production of processed iron in Manchuria reached 1,000,000 t (980,000 long tons; 1,100,000 short tons) in 1931–1932. By 1942, Anshan's Shōwa Steel Works total production capacity reached 3,600,000 t (3,500,000 long tons; 4,000,000 short tons) per annum, making it one of the major iron and steel centers in the world. Production was severely disrupted during the Soviet occupation of Manchuria in 1945 and the subsequent Chinese Civil War. However, from 1948 to 2001, the steel works produced 290,000,000 t (290,000,000 long tons; 320,000,000 short tons) 290 million tons of steel, 284,000,000 t (280,000,000 long tons; 313,000,000 short tons) of pig iron and 192,000,000 t (189,000,000 long tons; 212,000,000 short tons) of rolled steel. Annual production capacity as of 2006 is 10,000,000 t (9,800,000 long tons; 11,000,000 short tons) of pig iron, 10,000,000 t (9,800,000 long tons; 11,000,000 short tons) of steel and 9,500,000 t (9,300,000 long tons; 10,500,000 short tons) of rolled steel. A quarter of China's total iron ore reserves, about 10,000,000,000 t (9.8×109 long tons; 1.1×1010 short tons), are located in Anshan.

Band saw boxes are boxes made out of wood using only a bandsaw or fretsaw for cutting them out. The ability of these saws to cut arbitrary shapes with tight corners allows boxes to be cut from solid blocks with relatively little effort and much flexibility for their shape and style. The popularity of these boxes, often a new bandsaw owner's early project, has led to a plethora of books on them, dating from the first in 1985.
Design
The basic design is of two nested receptacles, making a hollow drawer and an enclosure to hold it, rather than a hollow box with lid. The same broad technique is used to make both parts: the reverse face of the box is sawn off and saved for later, then a large hole is sawn through the other piece. The retained piece is then glued back on, making an overall prismatic open-ended box.
The wood may be a solid block, a laminated block or a log from the woodpile. Whereas most boxes have straight sides and square corners, band saw boxes have virtually no restrictions as to shape. They can be oval, heart-shaped, lizard-shaped, or any shape the maker can think of. Other tools such as belt sanders and drum sanders can be used to shape and sand the box smooth.
Construction
There are multiple techniques for constructing band saw boxes. The primary technique starts by cutting the main shape of the box. Then a 1/8" to 1/4" piece of wood is cut off what is to become the back. The drawer shape is cut within the main shape, which involves cutting through the main body, and the body must be glued back together. Once the drawer shape is cut, the usual technique is to remove 1/8" to 1/4" of material from both the front and rear of the drawer shape to be used as faces. The remaining stock is then reduced or hollowed out to produce a drawer or cavity. The front and rear drawer faces are glued back to the remaining hollowed drawer stock, and the back that was cut off is glued to the main body. A handle can be added to the front of the drawer.
A bandsaw blade is a continuous loop, whereas a fretsaw blade is a straight strip with two free ends. This means that a fretsaw can saw a loop inside the wooden block, starting from a drilled hole; it's easy to unfasten the blade from the saw frame or fretsaw machine, pass it through and then reinstall it. This is impractical for a bandsaw. A bandsaw though can only saw from the outside in, so the outer part of the box always has a split left in it. There are several techniques for hiding this split. Usually, especially for free-form or googie shapes, the outer part of the box is sawn with a short, clean saw cut from the outside to the main loop cut, always parallel to the grain direction. Afterwards this cut can be glued and the outer squeezed to close up the gap. Sometimes the side of the box is sawn off by a separate cut first, either with the bandsaw or a more precise table saw. The loop cut now become an open-sided C shape instead, which is easy to cut with the bandsaw. Again the two parts are glued together again afterwards, and because the cut is along the grain it becomes near-invisible.

A Bann flake is a large, butt-trimmed, leaf-shaped lithic blade of flint or chert, dating from the Late Mesolithic period of prehistoric Ireland, from around 4500 BC onwards. They are named after the river Bann in Northern Ireland where large numbers have been found. The term is rather variably defined, and the uses of the flakes probably varied considerably, with many being all-purpose tools, and perhaps weapons. Some were probably used as spear heads attached to wooden shafts, despite many being rather heavy for this.
They are part of the Bann culture assemblage. Peter Woodman of University College Cork defines them as large flakes without a significant tang, with only light retouch. They come in two forms: elongated or laminar forms less than 3.2 cm across, or wider leaf shapes having only very peripheral retouch at the butt.

The bark spud (also known as a peeling iron, peeler bar, peeling spud, or abbreviated to spud) is an implement which is used to remove bark from felled timber.
Construction
Most bark spuds have steel heads and wooden handles, typically hickory or ash. The head is curved, sometimes in one direction with a single cutting edge, and sometimes more dish shaped and sharpened on three sides.
Method of use
In use, the sharpened edge is slid between the bark and the wood, removing the bark from the tree in a number of strips. It is especially useful at removing bark without damaging the wood below the bark.
Similar tools
A coa de jima is a similar specialized tool for harvesting agaves. The drawknife also removes bark from felled trees.

In architecture, a baseboard (also called skirting board, skirting, wainscoting, mopboard, trim, floor molding, or base molding) is usually wooden, MDF or vinyl board covering the lowest part of an interior wall. Its purpose is to cover the joint between the wall surface and the floor. It covers the uneven edge of flooring next to the wall, protects the wall from kicks, abrasion, and furniture, and can serve as a decorative molding.
At its simplest, baseboard consists of a simple plank nailed, screwed or glued to the wall; however, particularly in older houses, it can be made up of a number of moldings for decoration. A baseboard differs from a wainscot; a wainscot typically covers from the floor to around 1-1.5 metres (3' to 5') high (waist or chest height), whereas a baseboard is typically under 0.2 metres (8") high (ankle height).
Materials
Plastic baseboard comes in various plastic compounds, the most common of which is UPVC. It is usually available in white or a flexible version in several colors and is usually glued to the wall. Vinyl baseboard is glued with adhesive and can be difficult to remove or to replace. It has a long lifespan, which can mean lower maintenance.
Wooden baseboard can be available in untreated, lacquered or prepainted versions. Prepainted baseboards can be made from a single piece or finger jointed wood, often softwoods, while hardwoods are either lacquered, or raw for staining and made from a single piece of wood.
Medium-density fibreboard (MDF)) is a common material used for baseboard trim and molding. It is an engineered wood product manufactured from refined wood fibers combined with wax and resin binders. MDF is denser and more rigid than standard particle board and can be easily machined and painted.
Tiles can also be used as a baseboard.
Multi-purpose baseboards
Heaters are sometimes installed in place of or in front of baseboards. These come in electrical and radiator varieties, the latter relying on hot water as their heat source.
Where walls are difficult or expensive to modify, or must be left in their original state, and local regulations allow it, electrical wiring and signal cables may be routed round rooms inside cable channels, also known as trunking, that double as skirting board. The regulations for electrical wiring in the United Kingdom do not allow this type of installation.

The batán (also known as the silbatta in the Indian subcontinent) is a kitchen utensil used to process different kinds of foods in South American, Indian and Andean cuisine. It has a flat stone (Spanish: batán; Hindi: सिल, sil) and a grinding stone (Spanish: uña; Hindi: बट्टा, batta). The uña is held in both hands and rocked over the food in the batán. Depending on the use, the uña's weight can be slightly held back, allowed to move freely, or used to apply additional pressure. The rocking movements also vary depending on the application, and the grinding is done dry or with water or oil.
South America
The batán has been used since before the arrival of Spaniards in South America. In Andean households many different dishes are prepared in this manner, in rural and urban areas. The most important use it has is for preparing llajwa. For many Bolivians, Peruvians, Ecuadoreans and Colombians it is not the same when done in a blender.
It is also used to husk grains, wash quinoa from its alkaloid (saponin), grind grains, crush papalisa and even to prepare small quantities of flour.
South Asia (Indian subcontinent)
The silbatta (Hindi: सिलबट्टा, Malayalam: അമ്മി, romanized: ammi kallu, Tamil: அம்மி, romanized: ammi kallu, Marathi:pata-varvanta, Bengali: shil nora; Odia: sila puaa ; also called sil nora) is used in many Indian households. In Odisha, it is also worshipped as Bhu Devi or mother Earth during traditional Odia weddings and the Raja festival. It is traditionally used to grind spices and lentils in the states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala. These grinding stones are primarily used to prepare chutney and spice mixes for cooking and occasional use including grinding soaked lentils in preparation for dosas, vadas, or papadum.
The batta is held with both hands and moved back and forth (rolled, rocked) over the sil. The rocking moment vary depending upon the application and either the grinding is done dry or wet.
In Nepal, it is known as silauto-lohoro with silauto referring to flat stone and lohoro referring to a cylindrical grinding stone.
History
The silbatta dates to as early as 2500 BC. A simplified excavated specimen dated to the Indus Valley or the Indus-Saraswati civilization is showcased in the National Museum of History, Delhi.
Seals found from this civilization depict four types of silbatta or simple grinding stones, each used for a different purpose, such as religious activities or cooking.
Shri K T Achaya in his book, A Historical Dictionary of Indian Food mentions stone units used during the Neolithic era. One had a circular depression in which grains were crushed using a ‘rounded stone held in one hand’. The other was flat-ish that paired with a ‘cylindrical muller rolled with both hands’.
Gallery

Bath Cabinet Makers Ltd. traded for sixty-seven years (1892–1959) in Bath, Somerset, England, with a history of furniture-making. Under management of Charles A Richter (1876–1945) until 1934, its work was regularly illustrated in The Studio and the company soon began to receive international prizes. A variety of styles was produced, from Parisian-inspired versions of 'Adam' to Art Nouveau, Art Deco, Arts and Crafts and streamlined Modern in a huge range of woods, solid and veneer. Important contracts included furniture and fittings for Cunard's luxury liners, the Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth. A proportion of its output was mass-produced for cheaper markets although the workmanship was always of a high standard.
History
Initially the company was named the Bath Cabinet Makers Guild. It was known as Bath Cabinet Makers when its first factory was built in 1895, on Bellots Road, Twerton, which was one of the largest and best equipped in the country. Bath Timber Supply Ltd and Bath Guild of Handicraft and Design were set up in the 1920s to support Bath Cabinet Makers. George Montague Elwood was responsible for many of the Art Nouveau pieces around 1899–1900, but most of Bath Cabinet Makers's furniture was designed by the Richter brothers, Charles Augustus (1867–1946), Herbert Davis (1874–1955) and their team. Charles Richter became president of the National Federation of Furniture Trades and was appointed to Lord Gorell's Commission on improving the standard of art in industry. In JC Rogers' Modern English Furniture (1930) he is one of forty-two designers listed beside the better-known Barnsleys and Edwin Lutyens.
Bath Cabinet Makers owed its existence to a strike at F and A Norris Brothers' Bath's Albion Cabinet Works in December 1891. The following year, Charles Richter, an employee at Albion, launched the Bath and West Co-operative Cabinet Makers Ltd. The intention was determinedly idealistic; men needed jobs and the city provided enterprise. Shareholders were represented by a committee five members, one of whom was the influential Cedric Chivers from the bookbinding family. Richter was elected general manager the following month, and work began in rented accommodation.
In 1892 the name was contracted to The Bath Cabinet Makers Ltd. The next year, Charles Richter walked out, objecting to the Shareholders' reluctance to expand. Two years later the Society called him back as managing director, with Herbert Davis Richter Head of the Design Department. Herbert Davis Richter's drawings were reproduced in all the relevant leading architectural journals. In 1895 the brothers collaborated with Messrs Silcock and Reay on the design of a distinctive new building. In 1900, the firm won five medals at the Paris World Exhibition.
Idealism of Charles A Richter
William Morris considered that machines were responsible for bad design. As handwork was necessarily time-consuming, his furniture was too expensive for the very people he wanted to supply. In contrast, Charles Richter, a committed socialist and natural progressive, deplored asking men to perform arduous tasks that could easily be accomplished by machine. In Bath Cabinet Makers's early days, he set up an Education Committee and ran games and dramatic clubs. Acquainted with GB Shaw, he asked the playwright down to Bath for a performance of Caesar and Cleopatra.
Later years
Prior to World War I, Bath Cabinet Makers furniture was on constant display in London stores such as Maples and Harrods.
While Herbert Davis Richter left Bath Cabinet Makers in 1906 to become a painter, Charles Richter's hope of early retirement were interrupted by the war. The factories were converted to manufacture aircraft parts, to be restored to panelling, joinery and high-class furniture when the war ended. The family interest was extended when Herbert Davis Richter's wife, Gertrude, and Charles Richter's sister, Florence Schottler, launched The Guild of Handicraft and Design to make soft furnishings for large contracts coming in from America, India and Germany. Further recognition was earned at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley of 1924 and the Paris Exhibition of 1925. CAR's elder son Ian joined the firm in the early 1920s and became managing director in 1934. He produced some fine wood carvings that were used in the setting of BCM furniture, many on the Queen Elizabeth. The 1930s depression affected demand for luxury furniture but Charles Richter managed to keep his firm afloat.
In the early 1920s another factory was purchased on the Lower Bristol Road, by Fielding's Road, with a large the floorspace of 220,000 square feet (20,000 m2), known as the Bath Artcrafts Company. This building also provided space for the Bath Timber Supply Ltd, stocking a large range of wood.
Post 1945
Its name and the goodwill lasted for more than a century; in 1959 the firm was taken over by Yatton Furniture. Plagiarism had been a continual battle. From the outset Bath Cabinet Makers's prolific output and range of styles led to pirating by other companies. This has led to much of their work being attributed to other firms. Current research into Wylie & Lochhead and Bath Cabinet Makers reveals that prestigious museums throughout the country have believed that Bath Cabinet Makers furniture was made by the Scottish cabinet-making firm.
A new factory was built adjacent to the Lower Bristol Road factory between August 1966 and July 1967, on the other side of Fielding's Road. The factory was to a novel single floor design by Yorke Rosenberg Mardall architects, using a Metro space frame roof structure for the first time in the United Kingdom. In 1968 the building received the Financial Times Industrial Architecture Award and in 1969 a Civic Trust Awards commendation. In the 1970s this factory became a Herman Miller furniture factory. It was grade II listed in 2007, and renovated to become a series of retail units including a Lidl supermarket.
The company became part of the Christie-Tyler furniture group and in 1986 was bought out by Ken Fullalove, one of their directors.

Batoning is the technique of cutting or splitting wood by using a baton-sized stick or mallet to repeatedly strike the spine of a sturdy knife, chisel or blade in order to drive it through wood, similar to how a froe is used. The batoning method can be used to make kindling or desired forms such as boards, slats or notches. The practice is most useful for obtaining dry wood from the inside of logs for the purpose of fire making.
Tools
Tools used in batoning are: a strong, fixed-blade, preferably full tang knife or machete with a thick spine, and a club-sized length of dense or green wood for striking the knife's spine and tip.
Technique
The basic method involves repeatedly striking the spine of the knife to force the middle of the blade into the wood. The tip is then struck, to continue forcing the blade deeper, until a split is achieved.
Uses and advantages
This technique is useful for the simple splitting of wood for kindling, to access dry wood within a wet log, and for the production of shingles, slats, or boards. It is also useful for cutting notches, or making clean crosscuts against the grain of the wood. The technique is also especially useful when a chopping tool is not available.
Hazards
Care must be taken to avoid damage to the knife. Breakage of the blade is a common result of striking the spine of the knife at an angle. If this happens the broken blade can become irretrievably embedded within the split. In a survival situation, this can be catastrophic.

A batten is most commonly a strip of solid material, historically wood but can also be of plastic, metal, or fiberglass. Battens are variously used in construction, sailing, and other fields.
In the lighting industry, battens refer to linear light fittings.
In the steel industry, battens used as furring may also be referred to as "top hats", in reference to the profile of the metal.
Roofing
Roofing battens or battening, also called roofing lath, are used to provide the fixing point for roofing materials such as shingles or tiles. The spacing of the battens on the trusses or rafters depends on the type of roofing material and is applied horizontally like purlins.
Battens are also used in metal roofing to secure the sheets called a batten-seam roof and are covered with a batten roll joint.
Some roofs may use a grid of battens in both directions, known as a counter-batten system, which improves ventilation.
Roofing battens are most commonly made of wood or metal, but can be made of other materials.
Wall battens
Wall battens like roofing battens are used to fix siding materials such as tile or shingles. Rainscreen construction uses battens (furring) as part of a system which allows walls to dry out more quickly than normal.
Board-and-batten
Board-and-batten siding is an exterior treatment of vertical boards with battens covering the seams. Board-and-batten roofing is a type of board roof with battens covering the gaps between boards on a roof as the roofing material. Board-and-batten is also a synonym for single-wall construction, a method of building with vertical, structural boards, the seams sometimes covered with battens.
Spacers
Battens may be used as spacers, sometimes called furring, to raise the surface of a material. In flooring the sometimes large battens support the finish flooring in a similar manner to a joist but with the batten resting on a solid sub-floor as a floating floor and sometimes cushioned.
Trim
Batten trim or batten molding is a thin strip of trim typically with a rectangular cross-section similar to lath used in lattice, used to cover seams between panels of exterior siding or interior paneling.
Flooring
In flooring a batten may be relatively large, up to 2.5 inches (6.4 cm) thick by 7 inches (18 cm) wide and more than 6 feet (1.8 m) long.
Battens may also be used to secure carpet in place, where they are sometimes referred to as "gripper strips".
Batten doors
In door construction battens may be used to strengthen panels made up of multiple boards, as in a batten door, or to cover joins.
Wall insulation
Battens are used for solid wall insulation. Regularly spaced battens are fitted to the wall, the spaces between them filled with insulation, and plasterboard or drywall screwed to the battens. This method is no longer the most popular, as rigid insulation sheets give better insulation (with battens bridging the insulation) and take less time to fit.
Screed batten
In concrete work a screed batten is fixed to the formwork to smoothly guide a screed smoothing tool.
Lighting
In the lighting industry, battens refer to linear fittings, commonly LED strips or fluorescent tubes. Batten luminaires are typically cheap and meant to be fixed directly to structural battens in loft spaces or to ceilings and soffits in back-of-house areas where aesthetic value is not required. Fluorescent fittings may include a low-specification diffuser cover, or simply have the fluorescent tube exposed.
Sailing
In sailing, battens are long, narrow and flexible inserts used in sails, to improve their qualities as airfoils.

A bead is a woodworking decorative treatment applied to various elements of wooden furniture, boxes and other items.
A bead is typically a rounded shape cut into a square edge to soften the edge and provide some protection against splitting. Beads can be simple round shapes, or more complex patterns.
A bead may be created with an electric router, a special moulding handplane or a scratch stock. Beads are usually cut directly into the edge of the item to which the bead is being applied. However, beads applied across the grain are usually cut into a separate piece, which is then fixed in position.
A bead is also an important design element in wood turning, a ring-shape or convex curve incised into a piece by the use of a chisel or skew.
Types of beads
Angle bead, a projecting wood moulding at the corner of a plastered wall
Corner bead is similar, but is usually fully embedded in plaster or drywall, and usually plastic or metal
Nosing bead, the rounded projection of a stair tread over the riser below
Parting bead, or parting strip, the feature that separates two sashes in a sash window

Bear-resistant food storage containers, also called bear canisters or bear cans, are usually hard-sided containers used by backpackers to protect their food from theft by bears. Bear canisters are seeing increased popularity in areas where bears have become habituated to human presence, and are required in some places, such as Yosemite National Park in the United States.
Construction
A bear canister typically weighs between 2–4 lb (1–2 kg), and has a storage capacity of 400–900 in3 (6–15 liters). The actual capacity in number of days of hiking food stored varies with the appetite of the hiker, the selection of food, and the skill in which it is packed, but a 700 in3 canister likely holds up to a week's worth of food for the average hiker.
Hard-sided bear cans employ such materials as polycarbonate, ABS plastic, carbon fiber, and aluminum in their construction. An effective canister must resist both the tremendous strength and high intelligence of an attacking animal. Most containers are too large for a bear to simply pick up and carry away.
The lid of a canister is usually recessed in order to prevent it being pried off. Some manufacturers, such as Garcia require a tool such as a coin to open the canister whereas other manufacturers' products, such as the BearVault, use locking nubs that allow the user to twist the lid off without tools.
Regulations and testing
Several national parks and national forests require backcountry visitors to carry approved food storage containers. Backpackers who ignore this policy may face fines, property impounded, or eviction from the wilderness. Rangers may stop hikers and require them to produce their containers for inspection.
The Sierra Interagency Black Bear Group (SIBBG) and the Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee (IGBC) regulate the approval of food storage containers in parts of the western United States. Containers effective against the American black bears in the Sierra Nevada may not be effective against the grizzly bears found elsewhere. SIBBG conducts visual inspection and various structural tests, then containers are filled with food and left in the cages of captive black bears in a zoo in California. If the canister survives the zoo test, it is then conditionally approved. Full approval is only given after three months' successful field tests by users.
The (IGBC) first conducts a visual inspection to identify products that may be harmful to humans or the captive test bears. Next, food such as peanut butter, fish, or other attractant will be placed inside the container. This container will then be put in the grizzly bear enclosure at The Grizzly & Wolf Discovery Center in West Yellowstone Montana. To pass the IGBC certification, a bear must have a total of one hour of direct contact with the product, not counting licking. The product must remain functional and have no penetrations larger than 1/4 inch.
It is recommended that canisters be left on the ground, at least 100 feet/30 metres from the campsite. Suspending the canister can allow the bear to smash it to the ground or use the suspension gear to carry it away. Most canisters are designed to resist clawing and biting from bears rather than loaded drops from trees or cliffs. To prevent a bear from rolling it away, a hiker can leave the container in a bush, a shallow depression, or wedged between rocks or logs. Placing the canister near water could allow the container to float away. Reflective tape and labelling the container helps in recovery.
Bear bagging
An alternative is bear bagging, also called bear hanging or bear hangs, wherein items attractive to a bear such as food, toiletries, or other scented items are placed in a bag and then raised into the air with a rope — out of its reach. The rationale is that bears, being unable to reach the food, are less drawn to campsites and pose less of a threat to campers and their equipment.
Often this is done by tying another length of rope tightly between two trees or other tall objects. A bear bag should be at least 15 feet (4.5 m) high and 10 feet (3 m) from any vertical support. The counterbalance method, Marrison system, and Pacific Crest Trail method are a few different techniques to use when hanging a bear bag.
In alpine environments there are often not sufficient trees and smaller trees have been damaged by ropes rubbing over bark. Bear bagging can also be dangerous and resulted in a camper's death in 2011. Bears are also effective climbers who climb trees to retrieve hung food or bite through ropes.
In areas where bears pose severe problems, such as a majority of Yosemite National Park, bear bagging is ineffective and has been banned.
Product failure
Yellow-Yellow, a wild 125-pound black bear in the Adirondacks near North Elba, New York, figured out how to open several models of polypropylene and polycarbonate bear canisters. Yellow-Yellow was killed by a hunter in the fall of 2012.

A bearing sword is a type of oversized, unwieldy ceremonial sword usually carried by a squire or servant during parades to demonstrate the wealth and status of its owner. Often held upright and lavishly decorated, these swords were not intended for combat or practical use. Carried by royal bodyguards as a display of power, bearing swords were used throughout Europe from at least as early as the medieval period and as late as the 18th century.

Bellows are a device constructed to expel a controlled blast of air. The simplest type consists of a flexible bag comprising a pair of rigid boards with handles joined by flexible leather sides enclosing an approximately airtight cavity which can be expanded and contracted by operating the handles, and fitted with a valve allowing air to fill the cavity when expanded, and with a tube through which the air is forced out in a stream when the cavity is compressed. It has many applications, in particular blowing on a fire to supply it with air.
The term "bellows" is used by extension for a flexible bag whose volume can be changed by compression or expansion, but not used to deliver air. For example, the light-tight (but not airtight) bag allowing the distance between the lens and film of a folding photographic camera to be varied is called a bellows.
Etymology
"Bellows" is only used in plural. The Old English name for "bellows" was blǽstbęl(i)g, blást-bęl(i)g 'blast-bag', 'blowing-bag'; the prefix was dropped and by the eleventh century the simple bęlg, bylg, bylig ('bag') was used. The word is cognate with "belly". There are similar words in Old Norse, Swedish, and Danish and Dutch (blaasbalg), but the derivation is not certain. 'Bellows' appears not to be cognate with the superficially similar Latin follis.
Metallurgy
Several processes, such as metallurgical iron smelting and welding, require so much heat that they could only be developed after the invention, in antiquity, of the bellows. The bellows are used to deliver additional air to the fuel, raising the rate of combustion and therefore the heat output.
Various kinds of bellows are used in metallurgy:
Box bellows were and are traditionally used in East Asia.
Pot bellows were used in ancient Egypt.
Tatara foot bellows from Japan.
Accordion bellows, with the characteristic pleated sides, have been used in Europe for many centuries.
Piston bellows developed in Southeast Asia (probably by the Austronesian peoples) using the principles of the similarly indigenous fire piston. It led to the independent development of bronze and iron metallurgy in Southeast Asia. They were present in various Southeast Asian cultures, and the technology was transported to Madagascar via the Austronesian expansion.
The technology was later adopted and refined by the Han Chinese into the double-action piston bellows, replacing the native Chinese ox hide pot or drum bellows completely.
Piston bellows were independently developed in the middle of the 18th century in Europe.
Metal bellows were made to absorb axial movement in a dynamic condition. Often referred to as Axial Dynamics bellows types.
Chinese bellows were originally made of ox hide with two pots as described in Mozi's book on military technology in the Warring States period (4th century BC). By the Han dynasty, contact with Southeast Asian cultures exposed the Chinese to the bamboo-based piston bellows of Southeast Asians. The acquired piston bellows technology completely replaced the Chinese ox hide bellows that by the Song dynasty, the ox hide bellows were completely extinct. The Han dynasty Chinese mechanical engineer Du Shi (d. 38) is credited with being the first to use hydraulic power on a double-action piston pumps, through a waterwheel, to operate bellows in metallurgy. His invention was used to operate piston bellows of blast furnaces in order to forge cast iron. The ancient Greeks, ancient Romans, and other civilizations used bellows in bloomery furnaces producing wrought iron. Bellows are also used to send pressurized air in a controlled manner in a fired heater.
In modern industry, reciprocating bellows are usually replaced with motorized blowers.
Double-acting piston bellows
Double-acting piston bellows are a type of bellows used by blacksmiths and smelters to increase the air flow going into the forge, with the property that air is blown out on both strokes of the handle (in contrast to simpler and more common bellows that blow air when the stroke is in one direction and refill the bellows in the other direction). These bellows blow a more constant, and thus stronger, blast than simple bellows. Such bellows existed in China at least since the 5th century BC, when it was invented, and had reached Europe by the 16th century. In 240 BC, The ancient Greek inventor Ctesibius of Alexandria independently invented a double-action piston bellow used to lift water from one level to another.
A piston is enclosed in a rectangular box with a handle coming out one side. The piston edges are covered with feathers, fur, or soft paper to ensure that it is airtight and lubricated. As the piston is pulled, air enters from the far side and the air in the near chamber is compressed and forced into a side chamber, where it flows through the nozzle. Then as it is pushed air enters from the near side and the air in the far chamber flows through the same nozzle.
Double-lung accordion bellows
These have three leaves. The middle leaf is fixed in place. The bottom leaf is moved up and down. The top leaf can move freely and has a weight on it. The bottom and the middle leaves contain valves, the top one does not. Only the top lung is connected to the spout.
When the bottom leaf is moved up, air is pumped from the bottom lung into the top lung. At the same time air is leaving the bellows from the top lung through the spout, but at a slower rate. This inflates the top lung. Next the bottom leaf is moved down to pull fresh air into the bellows. While this happens the weight on the top leaf pushes it down, so air keeps leaving through the spout.
This design does not increase the amount of air flow going into the forge, but provides a more constant air flow compared to a simple bellows. It also provides more even air flow than two simple bellows pumped alternately or one double-acting piston bellows.
Primitive bellows
In archaeological ruins of the Levant, archaeologists have found primitive pot bellows, consisting of a ceramic pot to which a loose leather hide had been attached at the top. Such pot bellows were constructed with a wide rim, so that the hide covering would transmit a maximum amount of air when pumped. The covering was fastened to the pot with a cord under an out-turned rim, or in a groove just below the rim exterior. An opening near the base served to insert a pipe of perishable material whose purpose was to direct the air blast to either the furnace or crucible, and which was usually done through the mediation of a tuyère. Tuyères used in conjunction with pot bellows had the function of protecting the ends of perishable tubes leading from the pot into the fire. Places in Saharan Africa still make use of primitive pot bellows.
Further applications
Fluid transfer applications
Bellows are used extensively in hydraulic power circuits and cooling loops.
They are an essential part of anesthesia machines.
Cuckoo clocks use bellows to blow air through their gedackt (pipes) and imitate the call of the Common Cuckoo bird.
Musical instruments may employ bellows as a substitute or regulator for air pressure provided by the human lungs:
Accordion, concertina and related instruments
Reed organ
Pipe organ
Musette de cour, Uilleann Pipes and some other varieties of bagpipes
Harmonium and melodeon
Portative
Expansion joint applications
The term "bellows" is used by extension for a number of applications that do not involve air transfer.
Bellows are widely used in industrial and mechanical applications such as rod boots, machinery way covers, lift covers and rail covers to protect rods, bearings and seals from dirt.
Bellows are widely used on articulated buses and trams, to cover the joint where the vehicle bends.
Bellows are used in mechanical aneroids by acting as a precision indicator of pressure levels based on their lateral movement.
Bellows tubing, a type of lightweight, flexible, extensible tubing may be used for delivery of gas or air at near-ambient pressure, as in early aqua-lung designs.
Folding and view cameras use bellows to exclude light while allowing the lens to be moved relative to the film plane for focusing and, mainly in view cameras, to allow the lens to slide and tilt to control the image (camera movements).
Piping expansion joint: In this application, bellows are formed in series to absorb thermal movement and vibration in piping systems that transport high temperature media such as exhaust gases or steam.
Beekeeping
Bee smokers have bellows attached to the side to provide air to a slow burning fuel. This allows for an increased rate of combustion and a temporarily higher output of smoke on command, something desirable when calming domesticated bees.
Inflatables
Bellows are also designed as air foot pumps to blow up inflatables. They come in either high or low volume. High volume foot pumps (4-7 litres per stroke) are used for large inflatables, such as airbeds, inflatable sofas, paddling pools or large inflatable toys; with large amounts of air flowed into the large inflatable per step, the pumping time is reduced. However, the highest litre per stroke can require more effort despite less time. Low volume pumps (3 litres or less) are used for smaller inflatables, such as bike tyres, footballs, small inflatable toys, or pool mattresses - these are not to be used on large inflatables as compressing can be repetitive and time consuming.
Gallery

Bentwood objects are made by wetting wood (either by soaking or by steaming), then bending it and letting it harden into curved shapes and patterns.
Furniture-makers often use this method in the production of rocking chairs, cafe chairs, and other light furniture. The iconic No. 14 chair (also known as the "Vienna chair"), developed in the 1850s in the Austrian Empire by Thonet, is a well-known design based on the technique. The process is in widespread use for making casual and informal furniture of all types, particularly seating and table forms. It is also a popular technique in the worldwide production of furniture with frames made of heavy cane, which is commonly imported into European and Western shops.
Bentwood boxes are a traditional item made by the First Nations people of the North American west coast including the Haida, Gitxsan, Tlingit, Tsimshian, Sugpiaq, Unangax, Yup'ik, Inupiaq and Coast Salish. These boxes are generally made out of one piece of wood that is steamed and bent to form a box. Traditional uses of the boxes varied - they included storage of food goods and of clothing, and for burial. They were often without decoration while others were decorated elaborately. Today many are made for collectors and can be purchased from museums, gift shops and online sites as well as directly commissioned from the artists.
The Aleut or Unangan people of Alaska made hunting visors, called chagudax, out of driftwood using the bentwood method. Hunters in kayaks used the visors - they are said to help keep sea spray off the face as well as to improve hearing. They were often decorated with paints, beads, sea-lion whiskers and ivory figurines. Andrew Gronholdt revived the art of chagudax in the 1980s. Present-day Unangan artists create chagudax for ceremonial purposes and offer them for sale to the public as well.

A bevelled edge (UK) or beveled edge (US) is an edge of a structure that is not perpendicular to the faces of the piece. The words bevel and chamfer overlap in usage; in general usage, they are often interchanged, while in technical usage, they may be differentiated as shown in the image on the right. A bevel is typically used to soften the edge of a piece for the sake of safety, wear resistance, aesthetics; or to facilitate mating with another piece.
Applications
Cutting tools
Most cutting tools have a bevelled edge which is apparent when one examines the grind.
Bevel angles can be duplicated using a sliding T bevel.
Graphic design
Typographic bevels are shading and artificial shadows that emulate the appearance of a 3-dimensional letter. The bevel is a relatively common effect in graphic editors such as Photoshop. As such, it is in widespread use in mainstream logos and other design elements.
Glass and mirrors
Bevelled edges are a common aesthetic nicety added to window panes and mirrors.
Geology
Geologists refer to any slope of land into a stratum of different elevation as a bevel.
Sports
In waterskiing, a bevel is the transition area between the side of the ski and the bottom of the ski. Beginners tend to prefer sharp bevels, which allow the ski to glide on the water surface.
In Disc Golf, the 'beveled edge' was patented in 1983 by Dave Dunipace who founded Innova Champion Discs. This element transformed the Frisbee into the further-flying golf discs the sport uses today.
Cards
With a deck of cards, the top portion can be slid back so that the back of the deck is at an angle, a technique used in card tricks.
Semiconductor wafers
In the semiconductor industry, wafers have two typical edge types: a slanted beveled shape or a rounded bullet shape. The edges on the beveled types are called the bevel region, and they are typically ground at a 22-degree angle. While it is not possible to create a complete and functional die with the bevel material of a wafer, the area is still routinely processed throughout the manufacturing cycle to remove unwanted masks, residues, and films from the edge of a wafer that could potentially become a source of defects between manufacturing steps.
Welding
Beveling and chamfering (along with other profiles) are applied to thicker pieces of metal prior to welding, see Welding joint#V-joints. The bevel provides a smooth clean edge to the plate or pipe and allows a weld of the correct shape (to prevent center-line cracking) to join the separate pieces of metal.
Simple bevels can be used with a backup strip (thin removable sheet behind the plate joint) with chamfers (and a small land) being used on open root welds. Particularly thick plate will have a J-shaped chamfer or U-shaped groove to reduce the amount of welding filler metal used.
Cruciform joint preparation can involve a double bevel to permit full penetration of each weld to the other, removing a possible void space in the center.

A beverage-can stove, or pop-can stove, is a do it yourself, ultralight, alcohol-burning portable stove. It is made using parts from two aluminium beverage cans. Basic designs can be relatively simple, but many variations exist.
Total weight, including a windscreen/stand, can be less than one ounce (28 g). The design is popular in ultralight backpacking due to its low cost and lighter weight than commercial stoves. This advantage may be lost on long hiking trips, where a lot of fuel is packed, since alcohol has less energy per gram than some other stove fuels.
Of the available fuels, methanol delivers the least energy, isopropyl alcohol delivers more, pure ethanol the most; butanol is hardly ever used. Denatured alcohol and rubbing alcohol are frequently used for this purpose, as it often contains a mixture of ethanol and other alcohols. All but isopropyl alcohol burn with a smokeless flame; it can provide both light and heat.
History and design
The basic design dates back more than a century. It consists of a double-wall gas generator, a perforated burner ring, and an inner preheat chamber. A similar design was patented in 1904 by New York coppersmith J. Heinrichs. Trangia has been selling a commercial version of the design since 1925, and Safesport marketed a stainless-steel stove in the 1990s. The Trangia stove burner is made from brass, although all the other associated parts that come with it are aluminium.
In the unpressurized open-top design the double wall acts as a gas generator, transferring heat from the flame to the fuel. This effect enhances combustion, producing more heat than other passive designs. The inner wall also creates a convenient preheat chamber for starting the stove. Once the fuel has warmed up, its vapor will travel up the hollow wall, pass through the perforations, and form a ring of flame. This improves air/fuel mixing and therefore combustion. Vapor also rises from the center of the stove and burns when passing through the ring of flame as long as a pot is over the stove.
Pressurized designs have no cut-out in the top. They are filled with alcohol by separating the two halves of the burner, by opening a plug to a smaller hole in the center of the top side or by filling through the gas-jet holes.
A wick may be inserted into the hollow wall, where it will draw fuel upwards closer to the hot parts of the burner. Evaporating fuel from the wick removes heat from the top parts of the burner and subsequently the fuel at the bottom receives less heat. This slows down evaporation through the center while increasing the gas pressure inside the wall, spreading the ring of flame outwards, inwards, or vertically depending on the jet directions, while the center of the burner produces almost no flame, leading to a more controlled burn and faster starting. Suitable wick materials include fiberglass or cotton cloth. The wick will not burn because the evaporating fuel keeps it cool; also the pressure inside prevents oxygen from entering the hollow until the burner can no longer produce enough gas to support a flame. Cellulose cigarette filters wick fuel efficiently upwards but melt and burn in all but the least powerful designs. Other wick materials in use are Kevlar and other aramid fibers, carbon felt, fiberglass, and even toilet paper.
Aluminium-can construction
The stove is made from two aluminium can bottoms. An inner wall is cut and rolled from the can material. A ring of holes is pierced into the top with a pin. Parts can be glued with silicone sealant, high-temperature epoxy, or sealed with aluminum (thermal) foil tape, although this is not necessary. Total height is less than two inches (50 mm), though dimensions may be increased to hold more fuel or decreased to take up even less space.
The choice of aluminium has several advantages—light weight, low cost, and good thermal conductivity to aid vaporization of fuel. Modifications to the surface such as inking or painting a dark color increase the amount of radiant thermal energy captured by the stove body and change the stove's burn profile as a function of time, fuel load, and ambient temperature. Many designs require priming to get started and most are regenerative and stable during operation. Alternative construction materials have been used, including stoves made of tin cans such as cat food tins, tuna cans, and juice cans—the basic design is very similar. Windscreens/stands can be fabricated from tin cans, cut to size with ventilation holes added. Steel beverage cans of the classic twelve ounces (340 g) design are still in limited use and while they are heat resistant, their coating will burn off and they will rust if not cared for.
Operation and performance
Each stove works well to supply one or two people. When used to cook larger meals (greater than 2 cups (0.5 litres)), it is less efficient than a more-powerful stove which delivers more heat to a pot. This is because a longer time is required to reach the boiling temperature, during which more heat is lost to the surroundings.
To use the stove, a small amount of fuel is poured into the stove and ignited. The pot is then placed above the stove, on a windscreen or stand. The flame is small at first, only burning from the inner chamber. Once the fuel has warmed up (requiring about one minute) its vapor will pass through the perforations and form a ring of flame. Enough heat from the flame is passed to the fuel to maintain full combustion until the fuel runs out.
Ratings
Time to boil 2 cups (500 mL): ~4–12 minutes (45 mL of fuel)
Time to boil 4 cups (1 L): ~10–24 minutes (90 mL of fuel)
Burn time: ~10–20 minutes (60 mL/4 tablespoons of fuel)
Boil times can be significantly reduced by using a pot of the appropriate diameter (to reduce heat loss on the sides of the pot) and especially by a wind screen which maximizes efficiency.
Time to boil 2 cups (500 mL): ~5 minutes at 6500 ft (2000m) altitude with ambient temp of ~45F (7C) and water temp of ~55F (13C).
Comparison with other stoves
The stove can outperform some commercial models in cold or high-altitude environments, where propane and butane canisters might fail. Roland Mueser, in Long-Distance Hiking, surveyed hikers on the Appalachian Trail and found that this stove was the only design with a zero-percent failure rate.
Fuel usage (by weight) is about fifty percent greater than a butane/propane stove. Can stoves weigh less than one ounce (28 g), compared with three ounces (85 g) for the lightest gas stoves. Many commercial stoves also require special fuel canisters, adding to overall stove weight. No such canisters are necessary in a can stove; denatured alcohol can be carried in virtually any lightweight container, such as a plastic soda bottle. The weight advantage of the beverage-can stove is diminished by the greater fuel consumption (especially on longer hikes), but may still be offset by its reliability and simplicity.
Other attributes of the beverage-can stove are its nearly silent operation and its suitability as an emergency backup.
Denatured alcohol is a (relatively) environmentally-friendly fuel that does not leave a residue or soot. Denatured alcohol is commonly available at camping outfitters and hardware stores. Denatured alcohol is toxic to drink.
Non-toxic pure ethanol is rarely used as stove fuel in the United States, since it is usually subject to a liquor tax. However it also has some medicinal use in treating stings and bites, as a coolant, and antiseptic.
These stoves operate marginally on 90% isopropyl alcohol, poorly on 70% and not at all with 50%. Water typically cannot be boiled with isopropyl rubbing alcohol, but if the more rarely found (still inexpensive) laboratory grade or "gas drier" is used, and the sooting is dealt with by applying a little soap solution to the pot, the fuel value of the alcohol will reduce boiling times, not increase them.
Variations
Standard
The classic ultra-lightweight backpacking stove. Designed for one person, lighter than commercial models of the same design
Inverted two-piece
Smaller and lighter than the standard version; difficult to fill
Side-burner
Doubles as its own pot stand (holes are in the side). A tight-fitting pot can increase fuel pressure
Pressurized
A more powerful version. A hole in the top of the stove is sealed with a thumbscrew after filling with fuel; this allows the stove to control the rate of heat output. An additional base is used to hold fuel for preheating
Back-pressured
Back-pressured stoves simplify the pressurized design by eliminating the thumbscrew and the base needed for preheating, while still controlling the rate of energy output
Insulated
A variation on the standard design, with an inner wall and insulated with fiberglass
Other
Numerous designs in use
Multiple-unit
More than one unit can be used under the same pot when cooking for a larger number of people
Safety issues
Alcohol stoves are inherently dangerous, since spilling is possible and the fuel burns with a nearly invisible flame. If a spill occurs the best course of action often is to step back and let the alcohol burn up.
A stove with a deep well is wind and blow-out resistant—blowing into it can send burning alcohol flying. A stove with a small, shallow well, or a central wick may or may not be blown out to stop it from burning. A safe and lightweight snuff cap or simmer ring is added to some stove designs. Yet alcohol remains safer than most camping fuels. An alcohol fire can be extinguished with plain water, and alcohol fumes are mostly non-explosive.
Fuel must never be added when the flame is still burning.
The Trangia fuel bottles do not automatically shut off, nor do they prevent flashback. While the valve does close if released, human reflex is not fast enough to release the valve if flashback occurs.
The Boy Scouts of America prohibits "equipment that is handcrafted... due to legal concerns. Examples include alcohol-burning 'can' stoves..." The nearly invisible flame and the risk of spilling burning fuel can cause burns.

Bimetal refers to an object that is composed of two separate metals joined together. Instead of being a mixture of two or more metals, like alloys, bimetallic objects consist of layers of different metals. Trimetal and tetrametal refer to objects composed of three and four separate metals respectively. A bimetal bar is usually made of brass and iron.
Bimetallic strips and disks, which convert a temperature change into mechanical displacement, are the most recognized bimetallic objects due to their name. However, there are other common bimetallic objects. For example, tin cans consist of steel covered with tin. The tin prevents the can from rusting. To cut costs and prevent people from melting them down for their metal, coins are often composed of a cheap metal covered with a more expensive metal. For example, the United States penny was changed from 95% copper to 95% zinc, with a thin copper plating to retain its appearance. A common type of trimetallic object (before the all-aluminium can) was a tin-plated steel can with an aluminum lid with a pull tab. Making the lid out of aluminum allowed it to be pulled off by hand instead of using a can opener, but these cans proved difficult to recycle owing to their mix of metals.
Blades for bandsaws and reciprocating saws are often made with bimetal construction. The teeth, made of high-speed steel, are bonded (by various methods, for example, electron beam welding or laser beam welding) to the softer high-carbon steel base. Such construction makes for blades with a better combination of cutting speed and durability than shown by non-bimetal blades, because the advantages and disadvantages of each of the metals are applied in the best locations: the teeth are harder (and thus cut better), but therefore also brittler; meanwhile, the body area of the band is softer (which would make for poorer teeth), but also less brittle, and thus more resistant to cracking and breaking (which is desirable in the body area).

Binchō-tan (Japanese: 備長炭, [biɲtɕoꜜːtaɴ]), also called white charcoal or binchō-zumi, is a type of high-quality charcoal traditionally used in Japanese cooking. Its use dates back to the Edo period when during the Genroku era, a craftsman named Bichū-ya Chōzaemon (備中屋 長左衛門) began to produce it in Tanabe, Wakayama. The typical raw material used to make binchō-tan in Japan is oak, specifically ubame oak, now the official tree of Wakayama Prefecture. Wakayama continues to be a major producer of high-quality charcoal, with the town of Minabe, Wakayama, producing more binchō-tan than any other town in Japan. Binchō-tan produced in Wakayama is referred to as Kishū binchō-tan (紀州備長炭), Kishū being the old name of Wakayama.
White charcoal is made by pyrolysing wood in a kiln at approximately 240 °C (464 °F) for 120 hours, then raising the temperature to around 1,000 °C (1,830 °F). Once carbonised, the material is taken out and covered to cure in a damp mixture of earth, sand, and ash.
Binchō-tan is a type of hardwood charcoal which takes the natural shape of the wood that was used to make it. It is also harder than black charcoal, ringing with a metallic sound when struck. Due to its physical structure, binchō-tan takes on a whiter or even metallic appearance. Apart from being used for cooking, it has other benefits, such as absorption of odors.
Kishū Binchō-tan
Kishū Binchō-tan is the charcoal from which Binchō-tan originated, produced in Wakayama Prefecture, Japan, particularly in the central region, including Hidakagawa Town. To preserve its quality and traditional production methods, Wakayama Prefecture designated the techniques for producing Kishū Binchō-tan as an intangible folk cultural property on April 9, 1974.
However, as the definition of binchō-tan broadened and lower-quality or counterfeit products became more common, charcoal produced in Wakayama began to be specifically called Kishū Binchō-tan to distinguish it and maintain its quality and tradition. On October 27, 2006, Kishū Binchō-tan became the first regional brand certified under Japan's Regional Collective Trademark system.
The raw material used is typically ubame oak (Quercus phillyraeoides), and the charcoal is known for its hardness and metallic ringing sound when struck. Wakayama continues to be a major producer of high-quality binchō-tan, which is highly regarded both domestically and internationally.
Although charcoal is generally classified as hazardous and its transport or carriage on aircraft is restricted, Kishū Binchō-tan bearing the yellow “Kishū Binchō-tan” label issued by the Wakayama Prefectural Charcoal Cooperative and marked “NON-DANGEROUS GOODS” is exceptionally allowed for air transport. Japan Airlines permits the carriage of such certified Kishū Binchō-tan on domestic flights, while the policies of other airlines remain unclear. This label also serves as a certification of the product’s authenticity.

Bioresorbable (or bioabsorbable) metallic glass is a type of amorphous metal, which is based on the Mg-Zn-Ca ternary system. Containing only elements which already exist inside the human body, namely Mg, Zn and Ca, these amorphous alloys are a special type of biodegradable metal.
History
The first reported metallic glass was an alloy (Au75Si25) produced at Caltech by W. Klement (Jr.), Willens and Duwez in 1960. This and other early glass-forming alloys had to be cooled extremely rapidly (in the order of one mega-kelvin per second, 106 K/s) to avoid crystallization. An important consequence of this was that metallic glasses could only be produced in a limited number of forms (typically ribbons, foils, or wires) in which one or more dimensions were small so that heat could be extracted quickly enough to achieve the necessary cooling rates. As a result, metallic glass specimens (with a few exceptions) were limited to thicknesses of less than one hundred micrometers.
Mg-Zn-Ca based metallic glasses are a relatively new group of amorphous metals, possessing commercial and technical advantages over early compositions. Gu and co-workers produced the first Mg-Zn-Ca BMG in 2005, reporting high glass forming ability, high strength and most importantly exceptional plasticity. This lanthanide-free, Mg-based glass attracted immediate interest due to its low density and cost, and particularly because of its uncharacteristically high ductility. This property was unexpected for such compositions, as the constituent elements are found to be of relatively low Poisson ratio, and hence contribute little to the inherent plasticity of the glass. This unlikely asset was seized upon by Li in 2008, who made use of the Poisson ratio principle and increased Mg content at the expense of Zn to further enhance plasticity. Further improvements were achieved by incremental addition of Ca to the Mg72Zn28 binary composition, producing numerous ternary alloys along the 350 °C isotherm of the Mg-Zn-Ca system.
Ternary Ca-Mg-Zn bulk metallic glasses were also discovered in 2005. Similar to the Mg-Zn-Ca, these two amorphous alloys are both bioresorbable metallic glasses and are based on the same Mg-Zn-Ca ternary system. The elements are displayed in order of decreasing atomic concentration. Hence, the distinction between these two metallic glasses lies in their most dominant element, namely Ca and Mg. These Ca-based bulk glassy alloys had compositions of Ca55Mg15+xZn30-x, Ca60Mg10+yZn30-y, and Ca55+zMg25-zZn20, where x = 0, 5 and 10; y = 0, 5, 7.5, 10, and 15; and z = 0, 5, 7.5, 10, and 15. Critical casting thicknesses of up to 10 mm were achieved.
Properties
Unlike traditional steel or titanium, this material dissolves in organisms at a rate of roughly 1 millimeter per month and is replaced with bone tissue. This speed can be adjusted by varying the content of zinc.
Amorphous Ca65Zn20Mg15 alloy exhibits extremely poor corrosion resistance. Wang et al. reported that the said amorphous alloy completely disintegrated after no more than 3 hours exposure in biocorrosion environment. In static distilled water at room temperature, Dahlman et al. also reported destructive corrosion reactions of the same material, decomposing into a multiphase powder.
Ca-BMGs with higher Zn contents as reported by Cao et al. showed an elastic modulus in the range of 35–46 GPa, and a hardness of 0.7–1.4 GPa.
Recent developments
Metallic glasses based on the Mg-Zn-Ca ternary alloy system only consist of the elements which already exist inside the human body. As such, it is being explored as a potential bioresorbable biomaterial for use in orthopaedic applications.

Biochar is a form of charcoal, sometimes modified, that is intended for organic use, as in soil. It is the lightweight black remnants remaining after the pyrolysis of biomass, consisting of carbon and ashes. Despite its name, biochar is sterile immediately after production and only gains biological life following assisted or incidental exposure to biota. Biochar is defined by the International Biochar Initiative as the "solid material obtained from the thermochemical conversion of biomass in an oxygen-limited environment".
Biochar is mainly used in soils to increase soil aeration, reduce soil emissions of greenhouse gases, improve soil fertility, reduce nutrient leaching, reduce soil acidity, and potentially increase the water content of coarse soils. Biochar application may increase soil fertility and agricultural productivity. However, when applied excessively or made from feedstock unsuitable for the soil type, biochar soil amendments also have the potential for negative effects, including harming soil biota, reducing available water content, altering soil pH, and increasing salinity.
Beyond soil application, biochar can be used for slash-and-char farming, for water retention in soil, and as an additive for animal fodder. There is an increasing focus on the potential role of biochar application in global climate change mitigation. Due to its refractory stability, biochar can stay in soils or other environments for thousands of years. This has given rise to the concept of biochar carbon removal, a process of carbon sequestration in the form of biochar. Carbon removal can be achieved when high-quality biochar is applied to soils, or added as a substitute material to construction materials such as concrete and tar.
Etymology
The word "biochar" is a late-20th century English neologism derived from the Greek word 'βίος' (bios, 'life') and 'char' (charcoal produced by carbonization of biomass). It is recognized as charcoal that participates in biological processes found in soil, aquatic habitats, and animal digestive systems.
History
Pre-Columbian Amazonians produced biochar by smoldering agricultural waste (i.e., covering burning biomass with soil) in pits or trenches. It is not known if they intentionally used biochar to enhance soil productivity. European settlers called it terra preta de Indio. Following observations and experiments, one research team working in French Guiana hypothesized that the Amazonian earthworm Pontoscolex corethrurus was the main agent of fine powdering and incorporation of charcoal debris in the mineral soil.
Production
Biochar is a high-carbon, fine-grained residue that is produced via pyrolysis. It is the direct thermal decomposition of biomass in the absence of oxygen, which prevents combustion, and produces a mixture of solids (biochar), liquid (bio-oil), and gas (syngas) products.
Gasification
Gasifiers produce most of the biochar sold in the United States. The gasification process consists of four main stages: oxidation, drying, pyrolysis, and reduction. Temperature during pyrolysis in gasifiers is 250–550 °C (523–823 K), 600–800 °C (873–1,073 K) in the reduction zone, and 800–1,000 °C (1,070–1,270 K) in the combustion zone.
The specific yield from pyrolysis (the step of gasification that produces biochar) is dependent on process conditions such as temperature, heating rate, and residence time. These parameters can be tuned to produce either more energy or more biochar. Temperatures of 400–500 °C (673–773 K) produce more char, whereas temperatures above 700 °C (973 K) favor the yield of liquid and gas fuel components. Pyrolysis occurs more quickly at higher temperatures, typically requiring seconds rather than hours. The increasing heating rate leads to a decrease in biochar yield, while the temperature is in the range of 350–600 °C (623–873 K). Typical yields are 60% bio-oil, 20% biochar, and 20% syngas. By comparison, slow pyrolysis can produce substantially more char (≈35%); this contributes to soil fertility. Once initialized, both processes produce net energy. For typical inputs, the energy required to run a "fast" pyrolyzer is approximately 15% of the energy that it outputs. Pyrolysis plants can use the syngas output and yield 3–9 times the amount of energy required to run.
The Amazonian pit/trench method, in contrast, harvests neither bio-oil nor syngas, and releases CO2, black carbon, and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) (and potentially, toxicants) into the air, though less greenhouse gasses than captured during the growth of the biomass. Commercial-scale systems process agricultural waste, paper byproducts, and even municipal waste and typically eliminate these side effects by capturing and using the liquid and gas products. The 2018 winner of the X Prize Foundation for atmospheric water generators harvests potable water from the drying stage of the gasification process. The production of biochar as an output is not a priority in most cases.
Small-scale methods
Smallholder farmers in developing countries easily produce their own biochar without special equipment. They make piles of crop waste (e.g., maize stalks, rice straw, or wheat straw), light the piles on the top, and quench the embers with dirt or water to make biochar. This method greatly reduces smoke compared to traditional methods of burning crop waste. This method is known as the top-down burn or conservation burn.
Alternatively, more industrial methods can be used on small scales. While in a centralized system, unused biomass is brought to a central plant for processing into biochar, it is also possible for each farmer or group of farmers to operate a kiln. In this scenario, a truck equipped with a pyrolyzer moves from place to place to pyrolyze biomass. Vehicle power comes from the syngas stream, while the biochar remains on the farm. The biofuel is sent to a refinery or storage site. Factors that influence the choice of system type include the cost of transportation of the liquid and solid byproducts, the amount of material to be processed, and the ability to supply the power grid.
Various companies in North America, Australia, and England also sell biochar or biochar production units. In Sweden, the 'Stockholm Solution' is an urban tree planting system that uses 30% biochar to support urban forest growth. At the 2009 International Biochar Conference, a mobile pyrolysis unit with a specified intake of 1,000 pounds (450 kg) was introduced for agricultural applications.
Crops used
Common crops used for making biochar include various tree species, as well as various energy crops. Some of these energy crops (i.e. Napier grass) can store much more carbon on a shorter timespan than trees do.
For crops that are not exclusively for biochar production, the residue-to-product ratio (RPR) and the collection factor (CF), the percent of the residue not used for other things, measure the approximate amount of feedstock that can be obtained. For instance, Brazil harvests approximately 460 million tons (MT) of sugarcane annually, with an RPR of 0.30, and a CF of 0.70 for the sugarcane tops, which normally are burned in the field. This translates into approximately 100 MT of residue annually, which could be pyrolyzed to create energy and soil additives. Adding in the bagasse (sugarcane waste) (RPR=0.29, CF=1.0), which is otherwise burned (inefficiently) in boilers, raises the total to 230 MT of pyrolysis feedstock. Some plant residue, however, must remain on the soil to avoid increased costs and emissions from nitrogen fertilizers.
Hydrochar
Besides pyrolysis, torrefaction and hydrothermal carbonization processes can also thermally decompose biomass to the solid material. However, these products cannot be strictly defined as biochar. The carbon product from the torrefaction process contains some volatile organic components; thus its properties are between that of biomass feedstock and biochar. And although hydrothermal carbonization can produce a carbon-rich solid product, the process is evidently different from the conventional thermal conversion process, so the product is therefore defined as "hydrochar" rather than "biochar".
Thermo-catalytic depolymerization
Thermo-catalytic depolymerization is another method to produce biochar, which utilizes microwaves. It has been used to efficiently convert organic matter to biochar on an industrial scale, producing about 50% char.
Properties
The physical and chemical properties of biochars as determined by feedstocks and technologies are crucial. Characterization data explain their performance in a specific use. For example, guidelines published by the International Biochar Initiative provide standardized evaluation methods. Properties can be categorized in several respects, including the proximate and elemental composition, pH value, and porosity. The atomic ratios of biochar, including H/C and O/C, correlate with the properties that are relevant to organic content, such as polarity and aromaticity. A van-Krevelen diagram can show the evolution of biochar atomic ratios in the production process. In the carbonization process, both the H/C and O/C atomic ratios decrease due to the release of functional groups that contain hydrogen and oxygen.
Production temperatures influence biochar properties in several ways. The molecular carbon structure of the solid biochar matrix is particularly affected. Initial pyrolysis at 450–550 °C leaves an amorphous carbon structure. Temperatures above this range will result in the progressive thermochemical conversion of amorphous carbon into turbostratic graphene sheets. Biochar conductivity also increases with production temperature. Important to carbon capture, aromaticity and intrinsic recalcitrance increases with temperature.
Applications
Carbon sink
The refractory stability of biochar leads to the concept of biochar carbon removal, a process of carbon sequestration in the form of biochar. It may be a means to mitigate climate change due to its potential of sequestering carbon with minimal effort. Biomass burning and natural decomposition releases large amounts of carbon dioxide and methane to the Earth's atmosphere. The biochar production process also releases CO2 (up to 50% of the biomass); however, the remaining carbon content becomes indefinitely stable. Biochar carbon remains in the ground for centuries, slowing the growth in atmospheric greenhouse gas levels. Simultaneously, its presence in the earth can improve water quality, increase soil fertility, raise agricultural productivity, and reduce pressure on old-growth forests.
Biochar can sequester carbon in the soil for hundreds to thousands of years, like coal. According to the World Bank, "biochar retains between 10 percent and 70 percent (on average about 50 percent) of the carbon present in the original biomass and slows down the rate of carbon decomposition by one or two orders of magnitude, that is, in the scale of centuries or millennia". Early works proposing the use of biochar for carbon dioxide removal to create a long-term stable carbon sink were published in the early 2000s. This technique is advocated by scientists including James Hansen and James Lovelock.
A 2010 report estimated that sustainable use of biochar could reduce the global net emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane, and nitrous oxide by up to 1.8 billion tonnes carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) per year (compared to the about 50 billion tonnes emitted in 2021), without endangering food security, habitats, or soil conservation. However a 2018 study doubted enough biomass would be available to achieve significant carbon sequestration. A 2021 review estimated potential CO2 removal from 1.6 to 3.2 billion tonnes per year, and by 2023 it had become a lucrative business renovated by carbon credits.
As of 2023, the significance of biochar's potential as a carbon sink is widely accepted. Biochar was found to have the technical potential to sequester 7% of carbon dioxide on average across all countries, with twelve nations able to sequester over 20% of their greenhouse gas emissions—Bhutan leads this proportion (68%), followed by India (53%).
In 2021 the cost of biochar ranged around European carbon prices, but was not yet included in the EU or UK Emissions Trading Scheme.
Biochar adsorption of CO2 can be limited by the surface area of the material, which can be improved by using resonant acoustic mixing.
In developing countries, biochar derived from improved cookstoves for home-use can reduce carbon emissions (when the traditional cookstove is discontinued), as well as achieve other benefits for sustainable development.
Biochar has been proposed as a negative emissions technology with substantial long term climate mitigation potential. While early scenario studies focused on technical maxima and suggested that several gigatonnes of CO2 equivalent could be avoided annually, more recent work emphasizes that economically feasible deployment is likely to be smaller, with global removal potentials of roughly 0.3–1.8 Gt CO2 per year under carbon prices below 100 USD per tonne. Real world implementation remains at an early stage: global biochar production is estimated to be on the order of a few hundred thousand tonnes per year, delivering well under 1 Mt CO2 per year of certified removal, though voluntary carbon market deliveries and installed capacity have grown quickly in recent years. Because feedstock availability, logistics and co product use strongly influence costs, some applications are currently viable only where biochar provides additional agronomic or environmental benefits or can access carbon removal credits. The rapid expansion of publications on biochar has led to concerns in the literature that expectations for its climate role could trigger a ‘boom and bust’ cycle if projected benefits are not realized at scale..
Soil health
Biochar offers multiple soil health benefits in degraded tropical soils but is less beneficial in temperate regions. Its porous nature is effective at retaining both water and water-soluble nutrients. Soil biologist Elaine Ingham highlighted its suitability as a habitat for beneficial soil microorganisms. She pointed out that when pre-charged with these beneficial organisms, biochar promotes good soil and plant health.
Biochar reduces leaching of E. coli through sandy soils depending on application rate, feedstock, pyrolysis temperature, soil moisture content, soil texture, and surface properties of the bacteria.
For plants that require high potash and elevated pH, biochar can improve yield.
Biochar can improve water quality, reduce soil emissions of greenhouse gases, reduce nutrient leaching, reduce soil acidity, and reduce irrigation and fertilizer requirements. Due to its porosity, the small holes in biochar can keep water and dissolved minerals in the upper layers of soil, assisting plant growth and reducing the need for and expense of fertilizer. Under certain circumstances biochar induces plant systemic responses to foliar fungal diseases and improves plant responses to diseases caused by soilborne pathogens. Biochar can remove heavy metals from the soil.
Biochar's impacts are dependent on its properties as well as the amount applied, although knowledge about the important mechanisms and properties is limited. Biochar impact may depend on regional conditions including soil type, soil condition (depleted or healthy), temperature, and humidity. Modest additions of biochar reduce nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions by up to 80% and eliminate methane emissions, which are both more potent greenhouse gases than CO2.
Studies reported positive effects from biochar on crop production in degraded and nutrient–poor soils. The application of compost and biochar under FP7 project FERTIPLUS had positive effects on soil humidity, crop productivity and quality in multiple countries. Biochar can be adapted with specific qualities to target distinct soil properties. In Colombian savanna soil, biochar reduced leaching of critical nutrients, created a higher nutrient uptake, and provided greater nutrient availability. At 10% levels, biochar reduced contaminant levels in plants by up to 80%, while reducing chlordane and DDX content in the plants by 68 and 79%, respectively. However, because of its high adsorption capacity, biochar may reduce pesticide efficacy. High-surface-area biochars may be particularly problematic.
Biochar may be plowed into soils in crop fields or added to gardens to enhance their fertility and stability and for medium- to long-term carbon sequestration in these soils. It even shows good results when top-dressed. It has shown positive effects in increasing soil fertility and improving disease resistance in West European soils. Gardeners taking individual action on climate change add biochar to soil, increasing plant yield and thereby drawing down more carbon. The use of biochar as a feed additive is a way to apply biochar to pastures and to reduce methane emissions.
Application rates of 2.5–20 tonnes per hectare (1.0–8.1 t/acre) appear required to improve plant yields significantly. Biochar costs in developed countries vary from $300–$7,000/tonne, which is generally impractical for the farmer/horticulturalist and prohibitive for low-input field crops. In developing countries, constraints on agricultural biochar relate more to biomass availability and production time. A compromise is to use small amounts of biochar in lower-cost biochar-fertilizer complexes.
Biochar soil amendments, when applied at excessive rates or with unsuitable soil type and biochar feedstock combinations, also have the potential for negative effects, including harming soil biota, reducing available water content, altering soil pH, and increasing salinity.
Slash-and-char
Suggested as an alternative to slash-and-burn , slash-and-char farming techniques in tropical regions can decrease both deforestation and carbon dioxide emission, as well as increase crop yields. Slash-and-burn leaves only 3% of the carbon from the organic material in the soil whereas slash-and-char can retain up to 50%. The global potential for carbon sequestration by shifting from slash-and-burn to slash-and-char farming techinques has been estimated to between 0.22 and 0.42 Gt C/yr. Biochar reduces the need for nitrogen fertilizers, thereby reducing cost and emissions from fertilizer production and transport. Additionally, by improving soil's till-ability, fertility, and productivity, biochar-enhanced soils can indefinitely sustain agricultural production. This is unlike slash-and-burn soils, which quickly become depleted of nutrients, forcing farmers to abandon fields, producing a continuous slash-and-burn cycle. Using pyrolysis to produce bio-energy does not require infrastructure changes the way, for example, processing biomass for cellulosic ethanol does. Additionally, biochar can be applied by the widely used machinery.
Water retention
Biochar is hygroscopic due to its porous structure and high specific surface area. As a result, fertilizer and other nutrients are retained for plants' benefit.
Stock fodder
Biochar has been used in animal feed for centuries.
Doug Pow, a Western Australian farmer, explored the use of biochar mixed with molasses as stock fodder. He asserted that in ruminants, biochar can assist digestion and reduce methane production. He also used dung beetles to work the resulting biochar-infused dung into the soil without using machinery. The nitrogen and carbon in the dung were both incorporated into the soil rather than staying on the soil surface, reducing the production of nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide. The nitrogen and carbon added to soil fertility. On-farm evidence indicates that the fodder led to improvements of liveweight gain in Angus-cross cattle. Doug Pow won the Australian Government Innovation in Agriculture Land Management Award at the 2019 Western Australian Landcare Awards for this innovation. Pow's work led to two further trials on dairy cattle, yielding reduced odour and increased milk production.
Concrete additive
Ordinary Portland cement (OPC), an essential component of concrete mix, is energy- and emissions-intensive to produce; cement production accounts for around 8% of global CO2 emissions. The concrete industry has increasingly shifted to using supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs), additives that reduce the volume of OPC in a mix while maintaining or improving concrete properties. Biochar has been shown to be an effective SCM, reducing concrete production emissions while maintaining required strength and ductility properties.
Studies have found that a 1–2% weight concentration of biochar is optimal for use in concrete mixes, from both a cost and strength standpoint. A 2 wt.% biochar solution has been shown to increase concrete flexural strength by 15% in a three-point bending test conducted after 7 days, compared to traditional OPC concrete. Biochar concrete also shows promise in high-temperature resistance and permeability reduction.
A cradle-to-gate life cycle assessment of biochar concrete showed decreased production emissions with higher concentrations of biochar, which tracks with a reduction in OPC. Compared to other SCMs from industrial waste streams (such as fly ash and silica fume), biochar also showed decreased toxicity.
Fuel slurry
Biochar mixed with liquid media such as water or organic liquids (such as ethanol) is an emerging fuel type known as biochar-based slurry. Adapting slow pyrolysis in large biomass fields and installations enables the generation of biochar slurries with unique characteristics. These slurries are becoming promising fuels in countries with regional areas where biomass is abundant, and power supply relies heavily on diesel generators. This type of fuel resembles a coal slurry, but with the advantage that it can be derived from biochar from renewable resources.
Water treatment
Biochar also has applications in water treatment. Its properties, porosity in particular, can be modified using different methods to increase the efficiency of contaminant removal. Biochar is reported to remove contaminants such as heavy metals, dyes, organic pollutants.
Research
Research into pyrolysis and biochar is underway globally, but as of 2018 was still in its infancy. From 2005 to 2012, 1,038 articles included the word "biochar" or "bio-char" in the topic indexed in the ISI Web of Science. Research is in progress by the University of Edinburgh, the University of Georgia, the Volcani Center, and the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences.
Research is also ongoing on the application of biochar to coarse soils in semi-arid and degraded ecosystems. In Namibia, biochar is under exploration as a climate change adaptation effort, strengthening local communities' drought resilience and food security through the local production and application of biochar from abundant encroacher biomass. Similar solutions for rangeland affected by woody plant encroachment have been explored in Australia.
In recent years, biochar has attracted interest as a wastewater filtration medium as well as for its adsorbing capacity for wastewater pollutants, such as pharmaceuticals, personal care products, and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances.
In some areas, citizen interest and support for biochar motivates government research into the uses of biochar.
Studies
Long-term effects of biochar on carbon sequestration have been examined using soil from arable fields in Belgium with charcoal-enriched black spots dating from before 1870 from charcoal production mound kilns. This study showed that soil treated over a long period with charcoal showed a higher proportion of maize-derived carbon and decreased respiration, attributed to physical protection, carbon saturation of microbial communities, and, potentially, slightly higher annual primary production. Overall, this study evidences the capacity of biochar to enhance carbon sequestration through reduced carbon turnover.
Biochar sequesters carbon in soils because of its prolonged residence time, ranging from years to millennia. In addition, biochar can promote indirect carbon sequestration by increasing crop yield while potentially reducing carbon mineralization. Laboratory studies have evidenced effects of biochar on carbon mineralization using 13C signatures.
Fluorescence analysis of organic matter dissolved in biochar-amended soil revealed that biochar application increased a humic-like fluorescent component, likely associated with biochar-carbon in solution. The combined spectroscopy-microscopy approach revealed the accumulation of aromatic carbon in discrete spots in the solid phase of microaggregates and its co-localization with clay minerals for soil amended with raw residue or biochar. Biochar application consistently reduced the co-localization of aromatic carbon and polysaccharides carbon. These findings suggested that reduced carbon metabolism is an important mechanism for carbon stabilization in biochar-amended soils.

Biohydrometallurgy is a technique in the world of metallurgy that utilizes biological agents (bacteria) to recover metals. It is a subset or specialized form of hydrometallurgy, which refers to the use of aqueous solutions for metal extraction through a series of chemical reactions. Bioleaching is closely related to biohydrometallurgy. It focuses on extraction or liberation of metals from their ores through the use of living organisms.
Relative to traditional forms of metallurgy, biohydrometallurgy or bioleaching is slow but low cost. These techniques are mainly applied to recovery of copper and gold from low-grade ores. These techniques have been proposed to the extraction of uranium, nickel, and other metals.
Direct vs indirect leaching
Biohydrometallurgy can be productively implemented in two ways: direct and indirect leaching. Direct leaching entails physical contact between the ore and the microbe. The sulfide ore serves as an electron donor, which supplies energy to the organisms when coupled to the reduction of oxygen. Many sulfide ores are susceptible to direct leaching: covelite (CuS), chalcocite (Cu2S), galena (PbS), molybdenite (MoS2), and more. The energy producing conversion can be represented:
MS + 2 O2 → MSO4
"Indirect leaching" requires no physical contact between the organism and the sulfide mineral. Here the bacterial produce Fe3+ (ferric) ions, which can be viewed as the lixiviant. Ferric ions attack the sulfide (usually) ore. The general equation for the solubilization is:
MS + Fe2(SO4)3 + O2 → 2 FeSO4 +MSO4 + S
The bacterial then promote the reoxidation of ferrous by air and the oxidation of sulfur-containing products to sulfuric acid.
The sulfate salts are metal aquo complexes, not anhydrous as depicted. Similar reactions apply to the proposed leaching of nickel ions from pentlandite ores and uranium from UO2-containing ores. The net reaction is:
FeS2 + O2 + 2 H2O → FeSO4 + 2 H2SO4
Applications
Biohydrometallurgy was first used more than 300 years ago to recover copper. Early work on copper bioleaching was carried out at the mines of Chuquicamata and Lo Aguirre in Chile.
Pyrite
Bioleaching from pyritic ores (pyrite, marcasite, arsenopyrite) utilize iron- and sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, including Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans (formerly known as Thiobacillus ferrooxidans) and Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans (formerly known as Thiobacillus thiooxidans). There is no interest in obtaining iron salts from this kind of treatment. Rather, traces of precious metals such as gold may be liberated in the process since tiny particles of gold are often associated with pyrite.
One method of bacterial leaching, also known as "Indirect leaching,Fe3+ ions are used to oxidize the pyrite. This step is entirely independent of microbes. The role of the bacteria is oxidation of the liberated ferrous ions. The bacteria require nutrients such as ammonium and phosphate. The net reaction is:
FeS2 + O2 + 2 H2O → FeSO4 + 2 H2SO4
In terms of mechanism, an early step entails oxidation of pyrite to thiosulfate by ferric ion (Fe3+), which in turn is reduced to give ferrous ion (Fe2+). The ferrous ion is then oxidized by bacteria using oxygen:
4 FeSO4 + O2 + 2 H2SO4 → 2Fe2(SO4)3 + 2 H2O
Thiosulfate is also oxidized by bacteria to give sulfate:
S2O2−3 + 2 O2 + H2O → 2HSO−4
Although depicted as anhydrous, ferrous and ferric sulfates exist in aqueoue solutions as aquo complexes.
Copper ores
The process for copper is very similar. The main copper mineral chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) is not leached very efficiently, which is why the dominant technology remains flotation. The leaching of CuFeS2 proceeds according the route indicated for indirect leaching above.
Other ores
Bioleaching of non-sulfidic ores such as pitchblende also uses ferric iron as an oxidant (e.g., UO2 + 2 Fe3+ ==> UO22+ + 2 Fe2+). In this case, the purpose of the bacterial step is the regeneration of Fe3+. Sulfidic iron ores can be added to speed up the process and provide a source of iron. Bioleaching of non-sulfidic ores by layering of waste sulfides and elemental sulfur, colonized by Acidithiobacillus spp., has been demonstrated, which provides a strategy for accelerated leaching of materials that do not contain sulfide minerals.
Related speculative concepts
With fungi
Several species of fungi can be used for bioleaching. Fungi can be grown on many different substrates, such as electronic scrap, catalytic converters, and fly ash from municipal waste incineration. Experiments have shown that two fungal strains (Aspergillus niger, Penicillium simplicissimum) were able to mobilize Cu and Sn by 65%, and Al, Ni, Pb, and Zn by more than 95%. Aspergillus niger can produce some organic acids such as citric acid. This form of leaching does not rely on microbial oxidation of metal but rather uses microbial metabolism as source of acids that directly dissolve the metal.
In space
Microorganisms could be employed to mine extraterrestrially.
Environmental impact
The process is more environmentally friendly than traditional extraction methods. For the company this can translate into profit, since the necessary limiting of sulfur dioxide emissions during smelting is expensive. Less landscape damage occurs, since the bacteria involved grow naturally, and the mine and surrounding area can be left relatively untouched. As the bacteria breed in the conditions of the mine, they are easily cultivated and recycled.
Sulfuric acid is produced in the process of pyrite ores, potentially forming "Yellow Boy" pollution. The Finnish Talvivaara project proved to be environmentally and economically disastrous.

The Birch Creek Charcoal Kilns are a group of beehive-shaped clay charcoal kilns near Leadore, Idaho, built in 1886. They were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1972.
The kilns were built in 1886 to produce charcoal to fuel the smelter at Nicholia, which smelted lead and silver ore from the Viola Mine about 10 miles east of the kilns. The Viola ore deposit was discovered in 1881 and was mined until 1888 when the ore was depleted and the price of lead had fallen. The Nicholia smelter, located about 3 miles west of the mines, had two blast furnaces, each with a daily capacity of 40 short tons (36 t) of ore.
A Butte, Montana, man named Warren King built 16 kilns from brick made from local clay, possibly obtained from Jump Creek on the east side of the Birch Creek valley. The beehive-shaped kilns are each about 20 feet (6.1 m) tall and 20 feet (6.1 m) in diameter. When operating, each kiln used 30 to 40 cords of Douglas fir wood per load, producing about 1,500 to 2,000 bushels (70 cubic meters) of charcoal over a two-day burn. The kiln operation lasted for less than three years, employing 150 to 200 people at its peak, and had a monthly output estimated at 44,000 to 50,000 bushels (1550 to 1762 cubic meters) of charcoal.
The ruins of four kilns survive. They are located in the Caribou-Targhee National Forest, which operates the location as a public interpretive site. Nicholia is now a ghost town, with only a few ruins remaining. There are no surviving remains of the town of Woodland, a short distance south of the kilns, where the kiln workers lived. The kilns were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1972. The listing included four contributing structures on 6 acres (2.4 ha). In 1987, a volunteer-assisted stabilization effort prevented one of the kilns from collapsing. The Forest Service undertook a restoration of the kilns in 2000.

A birch-bark roof (in Finnish: malkakatto or tuohikatto) is a roof construction traditional in Finland and Norway for farmhouses and farm buildings built from logs. The birch-bark roof was the prevailing roof type in rural Finland up until the 1860s, when it was replaced by the use of other materials such as metal sheeting and later roofing felt. The tradition of birch-bark roofs has been revived in recent years as a craft in connection with the restoration of old farm buildings that have been converted into open-air museums.
Construction
The birch bark itself does not form the top layer of the roof. Once the main log frame of the building is constructed, the main horizontal roof poles are laid down; after this comes thin timber slats placed at right-angles to the base roof poles. On top of these then come the layers of birch-bark, each row overlapping the next. The number of layers could vary from 2 to 6 depending on the building. On top of the birch-bark layers were then placed long heavy wooden poles (usually de-barked young trees).
The poles on either side of the pitched roof would be interlocked at the roof ridge. The poles were held in place at the eaves by an eaves board. The poles nearest the end gable would further be fixed with tree-root bindings. Furthermore, rocks were often placed on the roof to further add weight. Alternatively, though less common, turf would be placed above the birch bark.
Benefits
The main reason for using birch bark was that when added in several layers, it acts as an efficient water- and damp-proof course. The birch trees would normally be de-barked, using a knife, during the summer.

In light frame construction, a birdsmouth joint or bird's beak cut is a woodworking joint that is generally used to connect a roof rafter to the top plate of a supporting wall. It is an indentation cut into the rafter which consists of a "seat cut" (the face of which rests on the top plate) and a "heel cut" or "plumb cut" (the face of which lies parallel to the supporting wall), forming a shape resembling a bird's mouth. The indentation should not extend unsupported on the interior in order to maintain the structural integrity of the rafter because the unsupported section can split along the grain of the wood. The joint is generally fastened with nails by toenailing the rafter from the side into the top plate below.
The depth of a rafter cut varies according to local building code differences in different locations. As a general rule, no more than one third of the depth of the rafter should be removed, in order to maintain structural integrity.

Bituminous geomembrane (BGM) is a type of geomembrane consisting of a reinforcing geotextile to provide mechanical strength and elastomeric bitumen (often called asphalt in U.S.) to provide impermeability. Other components such as sand, a glass fleece, and/or a polyester film can be incorporated into the layers of a BGM. Bituminous geomembranes are differentiated from bituminous waterproofing materials used in buildings due in part to their wide roll width, which can exceed 5m, and their substantial thickness of up to 6.0mm.
These properties are designed for environmental protection, civil infrastructure, and mining applications.
Properties
History
The earliest estimated use of bitumen dates back 40,000 years to the Paleolithic age and the historical use of bitumen as a waterproofing layer is extensive and well documented.
In 1926, successful experiments were conducted by the South Carolina Highway Department in which cotton fabric was installed on-site in combination with hot bitumen for road surface treatment. Continued experimentation and practical experience led to the development of prefabricated hessian woven fabrics with factory coated bitumen. Known as 'bithess' this material was made in significant quantities for rapid deployment in airfields and roads in World War II. By controlling the moisture content to maintain subgrade strength, this early geomembrane was credited by General William Slim to have played a significant role in the advance of the Burma campaign, a theater famous for its challenging jungle terrain and wet weather conditions.
The earliest reported use of a BGM in the United States was reported by Daniel W. Kappes P.E. in 1973 at the Manhattan mine in Nevada, where a polypropylene geotextile was coated on-site with asphalt emulsion to create an impermeable layer for heap leach extraction. This application predates known European BGM applications by as much as one year and marked an early milestone in the use of geosynthetics in mining. Published literature describing the modern development of the bituminous geomembrane can be traced back to the first double-liner system conceived of in 1974 by geosynthetics pioneer, J.P. Giroud. This novel bituminous geomembrane was made by spraying hot bitumen in-situ onto a polyester geotextile. Soon after these early installations, factory manufactured BGMs were developed with factory impregnation of bitumen into the geotextile allowing a high standard of quality control. Spray applied BGMs went entirely out of favor by 1988.

A bivouac shelter or bivvy (alternately bivy, bivi, bivvi) is any of a variety of improvised camp site or shelter that is usually of a temporary nature, used especially by soldiers or people engaged in backpacking, bikepacking, scouting or mountain climbing. It may often refer to sleeping in the open with a bivouac sack, but it may also refer to a shelter constructed of natural materials like a structure of branches to form a frame, which is then covered with leaves, ferns and similar material for waterproofing and duff (leaf litter) for insulation. Modern bivouacs often involve the use of one- or two-person tents but may also be without tents or full cover. In modern mountaineering the nature of the bivouac shelter will depend on the level of preparedness, in particular whether existing camping and outdoor gear may be incorporated into the shelter.
Etymology
The word bivouac is French and ultimately derives from an 18th-century Swiss German usage of Beiwacht (bei by, Wacht watch or patrol). It referred to an additional watch that would be maintained by a military or civilian force to increase vigilance at an encampment. Following use by the troops of the British Empire the term became also known as bivvy for short.
Construction
Artificial bivouacs can be constructed using a variety of available materials from corrugated iron sheeting or plywood, to groundsheets or a purpose-made basha. Although these have the advantage of being speedy to erect and resource-efficient, they have relatively poor insulation properties.
There are many different ways to put up a bivouac shelter. The most common method is to use one bivouac sheet as the roof of the shelter and a second as the groundsheet. The 'roof' flysheet is suspended along its ridge line by a cord tied between two trees which are a suitable distance apart. The four corners of the flysheet are then either pegged out or tied down to other trees. Care must be taken to leave a gap between the ground and the sheet to ensure that there is enough air flow to stop condensation.
A basha is a simple tent, made from one or two sheets of waterproof fabric and some strong cord. Generally a basha is made of reinforced nylon with eyelets and loops or tabs located along all four sides of the sheet and sometimes across the two central lines of symmetry. The basha is an extremely versatile shelter that can be erected in many different ways to suit the particular conditions of the location. (The word also sometimes refers to a special type of bivouac sack described below).
Bivouac sack
A bivouac sack or bivvy bag is a smaller type of bivouac shelter. Generally it is a portable, lightweight, waterproof shelter, and an alternative to larger bivouac shelters. The main benefit of a bivouac sack shelter is speed of setup and ability to use in a tiny space as compared to tent-like shelters. A bivouac sack is therefore a common choice for hikers, cyclists or climbers who have to camp in tight areas, or in unknown areas. A bivouac sack will usually have a thin waterproof fabric shell that is designed to slip over a sleeping bag, providing an additional 5 to 10 °C of insulation and forming an effective barrier against wind chill and rain.
A drawback of a simple bivouac sack is the humidity that condenses on the inner side, leaving the occupant or the sleeping bag moist. Moisture severely decreases the insulating effect of sleeping bags. This problem has been alleviated somewhat in recent years with the advent of more waterproof, but breathable fabrics, such as Gore-Tex, which allow some humidity to pass through the fabric while blocking most external water. A traditional bivouac bag typically cinches all the way down to the user's face, leaving only a small hole to breathe or look through. Other bivouac sacks have a mesh screen at the face area to allow for outside visibility and airflow, while still protecting from insects.
Since the 1980s, an increasing number of militaries including those of the US, UK and many European countries include bivouac sacks as part of their standard issue travelling sleep systems. These frequently are designed to attach to the same military's standard issue sleeping bags, and allow soldiers on expedition or away from base camp to keep their entire sleep kit in one individual and low profile system.
Boofen
In the German region of Saxon Switzerland in the Elbe Sandstone Mountains, climbers refer to overnighting in the open air as Boofen (pronounced "bo-fen"). The spot selected for overnight stays usually comprises an overhang in the sandstone rock or a cave, the so-called Boofe ("bo-fe"). This has often been adapted with a sleeping area and fireplace. In the national park itself, Boofen is only permitted at designated sites and only in connection with climbing, although in this case lighting fires is absolutely forbidden. The colloquial Saxon word boofen is a cognate of pofen (to sleep soundly and for a long time).
Examples
Count Henry Russell-Killough, the "hermit of the Pyrenees", is broadly accredited with the invention of the bivouac in extreme, inhospitable places. He would bivouac in the open, creating a blanket of rocks and earth or using a simple bag.
An example of a bivouac being made in a time of urgency was shown when the climber Hermann Buhl made his ascent of Nanga Parbat in 1953 and was forced to bivouac alone on a rock ledge at 8,000 metres (26,000 ft) altitude, in order to survive until the following morning.
Modern bivouacs have evolved to offer heightened levels of comfort for climbers and explorers. Modern portaledges (the vertical camping version of a tent) are a more comfortable, safer, and sturdier option to hanging hammocks.

A blacksmith is a metalsmith who creates objects primarily from wrought iron or steel, but sometimes from other metals, by forging the metal, using tools to hammer, bend, and cut (cf. tinsmith). Blacksmiths produce objects such as gates, grilles, railings, light fixtures, furniture, sculpture, tools, agricultural implements, decorative and religious items, cooking utensils, and weapons. There was a historical distinction between the heavy work of the blacksmith and the more delicate operations of a whitesmith, who usually worked in gold, silver, pewter, or the finishing steps of fine steel. The place where a blacksmith works is variously called a smithy, a forge, or a blacksmith's shop.
While there are many professions who work with metal, such as farriers, wheelwrights, and armorers, in former times the blacksmith had a general knowledge of how to make and repair many things, from the most complex of weapons and armor to simple things like nails or lengths of chain.
Etymology
The "black" in "blacksmith" refers to the black firescale, a layer of oxides that forms on the surface of the metal during heating. The origin of smith is the Old English word smið meaning "blacksmith", originating from the Proto-Germanic *smiþaz meaning "skilled worker".
Smithing process
Blacksmiths work by heating pieces of wrought iron or steel until the metal becomes soft enough for shaping with hand tools, such as a hammer, an anvil and a chisel. Heating generally takes place in a forge fueled by propane, natural gas, coal, charcoal, coke, or oil.
Some modern blacksmiths may also employ an oxyacetylene or similar blowtorch for more localized heating. Induction heating methods are gaining popularity among modern blacksmiths.
Color is important for indicating the temperature and workability of the metal. As iron heats to higher temperatures, it first glows red, then orange, yellow, and finally white. The ideal heat for most forging is the bright yellow-orange color that indicates forging heat. Because they must be able to see the glowing color of the metal, some blacksmiths work in dim, low-light conditions, but most work in well-lit conditions. The key is to have consistent lighting, but not too bright. Direct sunlight obscures the colors.
The techniques of smithing can be roughly divided into forging (sometimes called "sculpting"), welding, heat-treating, and finishing.
Forging
Forging—the process smiths use to shape metal by hammering—differs from machining in that forging does not remove material. Instead, the smith hammers the iron into shape. Even punching and cutting operations (except when trimming waste) by smiths usually re-arrange metal around the hole, rather than drilling it out as swarf.
Forging uses seven basic operations or techniques:
Drawing down
Shrinking (a type of upsetting)
Bending
Upsetting
Swaging
Punching
Forge welding
These operations generally require at least a hammer and anvil, but smiths also use other tools and techniques to accommodate odd-sized or repetitive jobs.
Drawing
Drawing lengthens the metal by reducing one or both of the other two dimensions. As the depth is reduced, or the width narrowed, the piece is lengthened or "drawn out."
As an example of drawing, a smith making a chisel might flatten a square bar of steel, lengthening the metal, reducing its depth but keeping its width consistent.
Drawing does not have to be uniform. A taper can result as in making a wedge or a woodworking chisel blade. If tapered in two dimensions, a point results.
Drawing can be accomplished with a variety of tools and methods. Two typical methods using only hammer and anvil would be hammering on the anvil horn, and hammering on the anvil face using the cross peen of a hammer.
Another method for drawing is to use a tool called a fuller, or the peen of the hammer, to hasten the drawing out of a thick piece of metal. (The technique is called fullering from the tool.) Fullering consists of hammering a series of indentations with corresponding ridges, perpendicular to the long section of the piece being drawn. The resulting effect looks somewhat like waves along the top of the piece. Then the smith turns the hammer over to use the flat face to hammer the tops of the ridges down level with the bottoms of the indentations. This forces the metal to grow in length (and width if left unchecked) much faster than just hammering with the flat face of the hammer.
Bending
Heating iron to a "forging heat" allows bending as if it were a soft, ductile metal, like copper or silver.
Bending can be done with the hammer over the horn or edge of the anvil or by inserting a bending fork into the hardy hole (the square hole in the top of the anvil), placing the work piece between the tines of the fork, and bending the material to the desired angle. Bends can be dressed and tightened, or widened, by hammering them over the appropriately shaped part of the anvil.
Some metals are "hot short", meaning they lose their tensile strength when heated. They become like Plasticine: although they may still be manipulated by squeezing, an attempt to stretch them, even by bending or twisting, is likely to have them crack and break apart. This is a problem for some blade-making steels, which must be worked carefully to avoid developing hidden cracks that would cause failure in the future. Though rarely hand-worked, titanium is notably hot short. Even such common smithing processes as decoratively twisting a bar are impossible with it.
Upsetting
Upsetting is the process of making metal thicker in one dimension through shortening in the other. One form is to heat the end of a rod and then hammer on it as one would drive a nail: the rod gets shorter, and the hot part widens. An alternative to hammering on the hot end is to place the hot end on the anvil and hammer on the cold end.
Punching
Punching may be done to create a decorative pattern, or to make a hole. For example, in preparation for making a hammerhead, a smith would punch a hole in a heavy bar or rod for the hammer handle. Punching is not limited to depressions and holes. It also includes cutting, slitting, and drifting—all done with a chisel.
Combining processes
The five basic forging processes are often combined to produce and refine the shapes necessary for finished products. For example, to fashion a cross-peen hammer head, a smith would start with a bar roughly the diameter of the hammer face: the handle hole would be punched and drifted (widened by inserting or passing a larger tool through it), the head would be cut (punched, but with a wedge), the peen would be drawn to a wedge, and the face would be dressed by upsetting.
As with making a chisel, since it is lengthened by drawing it would also tend to spread in width. A smith would therefore frequently turn the chisel-to-be on its side and hammer it back down—upsetting it—to check the spread and keep the metal at the correct width.
Or, if a smith needed to put a 90-degree bend in a bar and wanted a sharp corner on the outside of the bend, they would begin by hammering an unsupported end to make the curved bend. Then, to "fatten up" the outside radius of the bend, one or both arms of the bend would need to be pushed back to fill the outer radius of the curve. So they would hammer the ends of the stock down into the bend, 'upsetting' it at the point of the bend. They would then dress the bend by drawing the sides of the bend to keep the correct thickness. The hammering would continue—upsetting and then drawing—until the curve had been properly shaped. In the primary operation was the bend, but the drawing and upsetting are done to refine the shape.
Welding
Welding is the joining of the same or similar kind of metal.
A modern blacksmith has a range of options and tools to accomplish this. The basic types of welding commonly employed in a modern workshop include traditional forge welding as well as modern methods, including oxyacetylene and arc welding.
In forge welding, the pieces to join are heated to what is generally referred to as welding heat. For mild steel most smiths judge this temperature by color: the metal glows an intense yellow or white. At this temperature the steel is near molten.
Any foreign material in the weld, such as the oxides or "scale" that typically form in the fire, can weaken it and cause it to fail. Thus the mating surfaces to be joined must be kept clean. To this end a smith makes sure the fire is a reducing fire: a fire where, at the heart, there is a great deal of heat and very little oxygen. The smith also carefully shapes mating faces so that as they come together foreign material squeezes out as the metal is joined. To clean the faces, protect them from oxidation, and provide a medium to carry foreign material out of the weld, the smith sometimes uses flux—typically powdered borax, silica sand, or both.
The smith first cleans parts to be joined with a wire brush, then puts them in the fire to heat. With a mix of drawing and upsetting the smith shapes the faces so that when finally brought together, the center of the weld connects first and the connection spreads outward under the hammer blows, pushing out the flux (if used) and foreign material.
The dressed metal goes back in the fire, is brought near to welding heat, removed from the fire, and brushed. Flux is sometimes applied, which prevents oxygen from reaching and burning the metal during forging, and it is returned to the fire. The smith now watches carefully to avoid overheating the metal. There is some challenge to this because, to see the color of the metal, the smith must remove it from the fire—exposing it to air, which can rapidly oxidize it. So the smith might probe into the fire with a bit of steel wire, prodding lightly at the mating faces. When the end of the wire sticks on to the metal, it is at the right temperature (a small weld forms where the wire touches the mating face, so it sticks). The smith commonly places the metal in the fire so he can see it without letting surrounding air contact the surface. (Note that smiths don't always use flux, especially in the UK.)
Now the smith moves with rapid purpose, quickly taking the metal from the fire to the anvil and bringing the mating faces together. A few light hammer taps bring the mating faces into complete contact and squeeze out the flux—and finally, the smith returns the work to the fire. The weld begins with the taps, but often the joint is weak and incomplete, so the smith reheats the joint to welding temperature and works the weld with light blows to "set" the weld and finally to dress it to the shape.
Finishing
Depending on the intended use of the piece, a blacksmith may finish it in a number of ways:
A simple jig (a tool) that the smith might only use a few times in the shop may get the minimum of finishing—a rap on the anvil to break off scale and a brushing with a wire brush.
Files bring a piece to final shape, removing burrs and sharp edges, and smoothing the surface.
Heat treatment and case-hardening achieve the desired hardness.
The wire brush—as a hand tool or power tool—can further smooth, brighten, and polish surfaces.
Grinding stones, abrasive paper, and emery wheels can further shape, smooth, and polish the surface.
A range of treatments and finishes can inhibit oxidation and enhance or change the appearance of the piece. An experienced smith selects the finish based on the metal and on the intended use of the item. Finishes include (among others): paint, varnish, bluing, browning, oil, and wax.
Blacksmith's striker
A blacksmith's striker is an assistant (frequently an apprentice) whose job is to swing a large sledgehammer in heavy forging operations, as directed by the blacksmith. In practice, the blacksmith holds the hot iron at the anvil (with tongs) in one hand, and indicates where to strike the iron by tapping it with a small hammer in the other hand. The striker then delivers a heavy blow to the indicated spot with a sledgehammer. During the 20th century and into the 21st century, this role has become increasingly unnecessary and automated through the use of trip hammers or reciprocating power hammers.
Blacksmith's materials
When iron ore is smelted into usable metal, a certain amount of carbon is usually alloyed with the iron. (Charcoal is almost pure carbon.) The amount of carbon significantly affects the properties of the metal. If the carbon content is over 2%, the metal is called cast iron, because it has a relatively low melting point and is easily cast. It is quite brittle, however, and cannot be forged so therefore not used for blacksmithing. If the carbon content is between 0.25% and 2%, the resulting metal is tool steel, which can be heat treated as discussed above. When the carbon content is below 0.25%, the metal is either "wrought iron (wrought iron is not smelted and cannot come from this process) " or "mild steel." The terms are never interchangeable. In preindustrial times, the material of choice for blacksmiths was wrought iron. This iron had a very low carbon content, and also included up to 5% of glassy iron silicate slag in the form of numerous very fine stringers. This slag content made the iron very tough, gave it considerable resistance to rusting, and allowed it to be more easily "forge welded," a process in which the blacksmith permanently joins two pieces of iron, or a piece of iron and a piece of steel, by heating them nearly to a white heat and hammering them together. Forge welding is more difficult with modern mild steel, because it welds in a narrower temperature band. The fibrous nature of wrought iron required knowledge and skill to properly form any tool which would be subject to stress. Modern steel is produced using either the blast furnace or arc furnaces. Wrought iron was produced by a labor-intensive process called puddling, so this material is now a difficult-to-find specialty product. Modern blacksmiths generally substitute mild steel for making objects traditionally of wrought iron. Sometimes they use electrolytic-process pure iron.
Other metals
Many blacksmiths also incorporate materials such as bronze, copper, or brass in artistic products. Aluminum and titanium may also be forged by the blacksmith's process. Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin, while brass is an alloy of copper and zinc. Each material responds differently under the hammer and must be separately studied by the blacksmith.
Terminology
Iron is a naturally occurring metallic element. It is almost never found in its native form (pure iron) in nature. It is usually found as an oxide or sulfide, with many other impurity elements mixed in.
Wrought iron is the purest form of iron generally encountered or produced in quantity. It may contain as little as 0.04% carbon (by weight). From its traditional method of manufacture, wrought iron has a fibrous internal texture. Quality wrought-iron blacksmithing takes the direction of these fibers into account during forging, since the strength of the material is stronger in line with the grain than across the grain. Most of the remaining impurities from the initial smelting become concentrated in silicate slag trapped between the iron fibers. This slag produces a lucky side effect during forge-welding. When the silicate melts, it makes wrought iron self-fluxing. The slag becomes a liquid glass that covers the exposed surfaces of the wrought iron, preventing oxidation which would otherwise interfere with the successful welding process.
Steel is an alloy of iron and between 0.3% and 1.7% carbon by weight. The presence of carbon allows steel to assume one of several different crystalline configurations. Macroscopically, this is seen as the ability to "turn the hardness of a piece of steel on and off" through various processes of heat-treatment. If the concentration of carbon is held constant, this is a reversible process. Steel with a higher carbon percentage may be brought to a higher state of maximum hardness.
Cast iron is iron that contains between 2.0% to 6% carbon by weight. There is so much carbon present that the hardness cannot be switched off. Hence, cast iron is a brittle metal, which can break like glass. Cast iron cannot be forged without special heat treatment to convert it to malleable iron.
Steel with less than 0.6% carbon content cannot be hardened enough by simple heat-treatment to make useful hardened-steel tools. Hence, in what follows, wrought-iron, low-carbon-steel, and other soft unhardenable iron varieties are referred to indiscriminately as just iron.
History, prehistory, religion, and mythology
Mythology
In Hindu mythology, Tvastar also known as Vishvakarma is the blacksmith of the devas. The earliest references of Tvastar can be found in the Rigveda.
Hephaestus (Latin: Vulcan) was the blacksmith of the gods in Greek and Roman mythology. A supremely skilled artisan whose forge was a volcano, he constructed most of the weapons of the gods, as well as beautiful assistants for his smithy and a metal fishing-net of astonishing intricacy. He was the god of metalworking, fire, and craftsmen.
In Celtic mythology, the role of Smith is held by eponymous (their names do mean 'smith') characters : Goibhniu (Irish myths of the Tuatha Dé Danann cycle) or Gofannon (Welsh myths/ the Mabinogion). Brigid or Brigit, an Irish goddess, is sometimes described as the patroness of blacksmiths.
In the Nart mythology of the Caucasus the hero known to the Ossetians as Kurdalægon and the Circassians as Tlepsh is a blacksmith and skilled craftsman whose exploits exhibit shamanic features, sometimes bearing comparison to those of the Scandinavian deity Odin. One of his greatest feats is acting as a type of male midwife to the hero Xamyc, who has been made the carrier of the embryo of his son Batraz by his dying wife the water-sprite Lady Isp, who spits it between his shoulder blades, where it forms a womb-like cyst. Kurdalaegon prepares a type of tower or scaffold above a quenching bath for Xamyc, and, when the time is right, lances the cyst to liberate the infant hero Batraz as a newborn babe of white-hot steel, whom Kurdalægon then quenches like a newly forged sword.
The Anglo-Saxon Wayland Smith, known in Old Norse as Völundr, is a heroic blacksmith in Germanic mythology. The Poetic Edda states that he forged beautiful gold rings set with wonderful gems. He was captured by king Níðuðr, who cruelly hamstrung him and imprisoned him on an island. Völundr eventually had his revenge by killing Níðuðr's sons and fashioning goblets from their skulls, jewels from their eyes and a brooch from their teeth. He then raped the king's daughter, after drugging her with strong beer, and escaped, laughing, on wings of his own making, boasting that he had fathered a child upon her.
Seppo Ilmarinen, the Eternal Hammerer, blacksmith and inventor in the Kalevala, is an archetypal artificer from Finnish mythology.
Tubal-Cain is mentioned in the book of Genesis of the Torah as the original smith.
Ogun, the god of blacksmiths, warriors, hunters and others who work with iron is one of the pantheon of Oriṣa traditionally worshipped by the Yoruba people of West Africa.
Before the Iron Age
Gold, silver, and copper all occur in nature in their native states, as reasonably pure metals – humans probably worked these metals first. These metals are all quite malleable, and humans' initial development of hammering techniques was undoubtedly applied to these metals.
During the Chalcolithic era and the Bronze Age, humans in the Mideast learned how to smelt, melt, cast, rivet, and (to a limited extent) forge copper and bronze. Bronze is an alloy of copper and approximately 10% to 20% Tin. Bronze is superior to just copper, by being harder, being more resistant to corrosion, and by having a lower melting point (thereby requiring less fuel to melt and cast). Much of the copper used by the Mediterranean World came from the island of Cyprus. Most of the tin came from the Cornwall region of the island of Great Britain, transported by sea-borne Phoenician and Greek traders.
Copper and bronze cannot be hardened by heat-treatment, they can only be hardened by cold working. To accomplish this, a piece of bronze is lightly hammered for a long period of time. The localized stress-cycling causes work hardening by changing the size and shape of the metal's crystals. The hardened bronze can then be ground to sharpen it to make edged tools.
Clocksmiths as recently as the 19th century used work hardening techniques to harden the teeth of brass gears and ratchets. Tapping on just the teeth produced harder teeth, with superior wear-resistance. By contrast, the rest of the gear was left in a softer and tougher state, more capable of resisting cracking.
Bronze is sufficiently corrosion-resistant that artifacts of bronze may last thousands of years relatively unscathed. Accordingly, museums frequently preserve more examples of Bronze Age metal-work than examples of artifacts from the much younger Iron Age. Buried iron artifacts may completely rust away in less than 100 years. Examples of ancient iron work still extant are very much the exception to the norm.
Iron Age
Concurrent with the advent of alphabetic characters in the Iron Age, humans became aware of the metal iron. However, in earlier ages, iron's qualities, in contrast to those of bronze, were not generally understood. Iron artifacts, composed of meteoric iron, have the chemical composition containing up to 40% nickel. As this source of this iron is extremely rare and fortuitous, little development of smithing skills peculiar to iron can be assumed to have occurred. That we still possess any such artifacts of meteoric iron may be ascribed to the vagaries of climate, and the increased corrosion-resistance conferred on iron by the presence of nickel.
During the (north) Polar Exploration of the early 20th century, Inughuit, northern Greenlandic Inuit, were found to be making iron knives from two particularly large nickel-iron meteors. One of these meteors was taken to Washington, D.C., where it was remitted to the custody of the Smithsonian Institution.
The Hittites of Anatolia first discovered or developed the smelting of iron ores around 1500 BC. They seem to have maintained a near monopoly on the knowledge of iron production for several hundred years, but when their empire collapsed during the Eastern Mediterranean upheavals around 1200 BC, the knowledge seems to have escaped in all directions.
In the Iliad of Homer (describing the Trojan War and Bronze Age Greek and Trojan warriors), most of the armor and weapons (swords and spears) are stated to have been of bronze. Iron is not unknown, however, as arrowheads are described as iron, and a "ball of iron" is listed as a prize awarded for winning a competition.
The events described probably occurred around 1200 BC, but Homer is thought to have composed this epic poem around 700 BC; so exactitude must remain suspect.
The historical record during the Late Bronze Age Collapse is very inconsistent. Very few iron artifacts remain from the early Iron Age, due to loss from corrosion and re-use of iron as a valuable commodity. However, all of the basic operations of blacksmithing were in use by the time the Iron Age reached a particular locality. The scarcity of records and artifacts, and the rapidity of the transition from Bronze Age to Iron Age, is a reason to use evidence of bronze smithing to infer about the early development of blacksmithing.
It is uncertain when Iron weapons replaced Bronze weapons because the earliest Iron swords did not significantly improve on the qualities of existing bronze artifacts. Unalloyed iron is soft, does not hold an edge as well as a properly constructed bronze blade and needs more maintenance. Iron ores are more widely available than the necessary materials to create bronze however, which made iron weapons more economical than comparable bronze weapons. Small amounts of steel are often formed during several of the earliest refining practices, and when the properties of this alloy were discovered and exploited, steel edged weapons greatly outclassed bronze.
Iron is different from most other materials (including bronze), in that it does not immediately go from a solid to a liquid at its melting point. H2O is a solid (ice) at −1 C (31 F), and a liquid (water) at +1 C (33 F). Iron, by contrast, is definitely a solid at 800 °F (427 °C), but over the next 1,500 °F (820 °C) it becomes increasingly plastic and more "taffy-like" as its temperature increases. This extreme temperature range of variable solidity is the fundamental material property upon which blacksmithing practice depends.
Another major difference between bronze and iron fabrication techniques is that bronze can be melted. The melting point of iron is much higher than that of bronze. In the western (Europe & the Mideast) tradition, the technology to make fires hot enough to melt iron did not arise until the 16th century, when smelting operations grew large enough to require overly large bellows. These produced blast-furnace temperatures high enough to melt partially refined ores, resulting in cast iron. Thus cast-iron frying pans and cookware did not become possible in Europe until 3000 years after the introduction of iron smelting. China, in a separate developmental tradition, was producing cast iron at least 1000 years before this.
Although iron is quite abundant, good quality steel remained rare and expensive until the industrial developments of Bessemer process et al. in the 1850s. Close examination of blacksmith-made antique tools clearly shows where small pieces of steel were forge-welded into iron to provide the hardened steel cutting edges of tools (notably in axes, adzes, chisels, etc.). The re-use of quality steel is another reason for the lack of artifacts.
The Romans (who ensured that their own weapons were made with good steel) noted (in the 4th century BC) that the Celts of the Po River Valley had iron, but not good steel. The Romans record that during battle, their Celtic opponents could only swing their swords two or three times before having to step on their swords to straighten them.
On the Indian subcontinent, Wootz steel was, and continues to be, produced in small quantities.
In southern Asia and western Africa, blacksmiths form endogenous castes that sometimes speak distinct languages.
Medieval period
In the medieval period, blacksmithing was considered part of the set of seven mechanical arts.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, a "village smithy" was a staple of every town. Factories and mass-production reduced the demand for blacksmith-made tools and hardware.
Blacksmiths typically worked in small shops, often in the center of a village or town. Their shops were typically equipped with a forge, an anvil, and a variety of other tools. The work of a medieval blacksmith was physically demanding and often dangerous. Blacksmiths had to be able to lift and move heavy pieces of metal, and they had to be careful not to burn themselves on the hot forge.
Despite the challenges, blacksmithing was a respected trade in medieval society. Blacksmiths were considered to be skilled artisans, and their work was essential to the functioning of medieval society.
Women
Whilst the majority of blacksmiths named in Britain in the medieval period were men, some women also worked as smiths. For example, in 1346 Katherine Le Fevre was appointed by Edward III to ‘keep up the king’s forge within the Tower and carry on [its] work … receiving the wages pertaining to the office’. Another example is of Alice la Haubergere (Mail-maker) who owned an armour shop and worked as an armourer in Cheapside. In York in 1403 Agnes Hecche was left her father's mail-making equipment in his will, and took over the family business with her brother. Others included the bell founder Johanna Hill, the cutler Agnes Cotiller and Eustachia l’Armurer.
Medieval blacksmithing techniques
Medieval blacksmiths used a variety of techniques to create metal objects. One of the most common techniques was forging. Forging is the process of heating metal until it is soft enough to be shaped with a hammer and anvil.
Another common technique was welding. Welding is the process of joining two pieces of metal together by heating them until they melt and then hammering them together.
Blacksmiths also used a variety of other techniques, such as casting, cutting, and filing.
The original fuel for forge fires was charcoal. Coal did not begin to replace charcoal until the forests of first Britain (during the AD 17th century), and then the eastern United States of America (during the 19th century) were largely depleted. Coal can be an inferior fuel for blacksmithing, because much of the world's coal is contaminated with sulfur. Sulfur contamination of iron and steel make them "red short", so that at red heat they become "crumbly" instead of "plastic". Coal sold and purchased for blacksmithing should be largely free of sulfur.
European blacksmiths before and through the medieval era spent a great deal of time heating and hammering iron before forging it into finished articles. Although they were unaware of the chemical basis, they were aware that the quality of the iron was thus improved. From a scientific point of view, the reducing atmosphere of the forge was both removing oxygen (rust), and soaking more carbon into the iron, thereby developing increasingly higher grades of steel as the process was continued.
Industrial era
During the eighteenth century, agents for the Sheffield cutlery industry scoured the British country-side, offering new carriage springs for old. Springs must be made of hardened steel. At this time, the processes for making steel produced an extremely variable product—quality was not ensured at the initial point of sale. Springs that had survived cracking through hard use over the rough roads of the time, had proven to be of a better quality steel. Much of the fame of Sheffield cutlery (knives, shears, etc.) was due to the extreme lengths the companies took to ensure they used high-grade steel.
During the first half of the nineteenth century, the US government included in their treaties with many Native American tribes, that the US would employ blacksmiths and strikers at Army forts, with the expressed purpose of providing Native Americans with iron tools and repair services.
During the early to mid-nineteenth century, both European armies as well as both the U.S. Federal and Confederate armies employed blacksmiths to shoe horses and repair equipment such as wagons, horse tack, and artillery equipment. These smiths primarily worked at a traveling forge that when combined with a limber, comprised wagons specifically designed and constructed as blacksmith shops on wheels to carry the essential equipment necessary for their work.
Lathes, patterned largely on their woodturning counterparts, had been used by some blacksmiths since the middle-ages. During the 1790s Henry Maudslay created the first screw-cutting lathe, a watershed event that signaled the start of blacksmiths being replaced by machinists in factories for the hardware needs of the populace.
Samuel Colt neither invented nor perfected interchangeable parts, but his insistence (and other industrialists at this time) that his firearms be manufactured with this property, was another step towards the obsolescence of metal-working artisans and blacksmiths. (See also Eli Whitney).
As demand for their products declined, many more blacksmiths augmented their incomes by taking in work shoeing horses. A shoer-of-horses was historically known as a farrier in English. With the introduction of automobiles, the number of blacksmiths continued to decrease, many former blacksmiths becoming the initial generation of automobile Mechanics. The nadir of blacksmithing in the United States was reached during the 1960s, when most of the former blacksmiths had left the trade, and few if any new people were entering the trade. By this time, most of the working blacksmiths were those performing farrier work, so the term blacksmith was effectively co-opted by the farrier trade.
Neoclassicism era
In the final part of the 18th century, forged ironwork continued to decline due to the aforementioned industrial revolution, shapes of the elements in the designs of window grilles and other decorative functional items continued to contradict natural forms, surfaces begin to be covered in paint, cast iron elements are incorporated into the forged designs.
Main features of Neoclassicism ironwork (also referred to as Louis XVI style and Empire style ironwork) include smooth straight bars, decorative geometric elements, double or oval volutes and the usage of elements from Classical antiquity (Meander (art), wreaths etc.).
Typical for this kind of ironwork is that the ironwork is painted white with gold (gilded) elements.
20th and 21st centuries
During the 20th century various gases (natural gas, acetylene, etc.) have also come to be used as fuels for blacksmithing. While these are fine for blacksmithing iron, special care must be taken when using them to blacksmith steel. Each time a piece of steel is heated, there is a tendency for the carbon content to leave the steel (decarburization). This can leave a piece of steel with an effective layer of unhardenable iron on its surface. In a traditional charcoal or coal forge, the fuel is really just carbon. In a properly regulated charcoal/coal fire, the air in and immediately around the fire should be a reducing atmosphere. In this case, and at elevated temperatures, there is a tendency for vaporized carbon to soak into steel and iron, counteracting or negating the decarburizing tendency. This is similar to the process by which a case of steel is developed on a piece of iron in preparation for case hardening.
A renewed interest in blacksmithing occurred as part of the trend in "do-it-yourself" and "self-sufficiency" that occurred during the 1970s. Currently there are many books, organizations and individuals working to help educate the public about blacksmithing, including local groups of smiths who have formed clubs, with some of those smiths demonstrating at historical sites and living history events. Some modern blacksmiths who produce decorative metalwork refer to themselves as artist-blacksmiths. In 1973 the Artists Blacksmiths’ Association of North America was formed with 27 members. By 2013 it had almost 4000 members. Likewise the British Artist Blacksmiths Association was created in 1978, with 30 charter members and had about 600 members in 2013 and publish for members a quarterly magazine.
While developed nations saw a decline and re-awakening of interest in blacksmithing, in many developing nations blacksmiths continued making and repairing iron and steel tools and hardware for people in their local area.
Notable blacksmiths
Mythological and religious
Ptah, patron god of craftsmen and architects
Ame-no-Mahitotsu, god of metal-working and blacksmiths
Svarog, god of the forge, fire, the sun, and creation
Vishwakarma, Hindu god of blacksmithing
Goibniu, Irish god of blacksmithing
Ogun, Yoruba oriṣa of blacksmiths, iron and war
Hephaestus/Vulcan, god of metalworking and the forge
Thor, god of storms, metalworking, and the forge
Tubal-cain, in biblical tradition, the first smith
Sons of Ivaldi, in Norse mythology three dwarf brothers who make a variety of gifts for the gods
Mime, brother of Alberich, Wagnerian dwarf and maker of the sword Nothung and the Tarnhelm
Kāveh, in Persian mythology a blacksmith who launched a national uprising against the evil foreign tyrant Zahāk, after losing two of his children to serpents of Zahāk
Tlepsh and Kurdalægon, the Circassian and Ossetian formsm respectively, of the blacksmith hero of the Narts, who presides at the birth / quenching of the steel child who grows into the hero Batraz / Pataraz
Historical
James Black, creator of original Bowie knife
John Silvester, a blacksmith at the Tower of London
Panday Pira, the first Filipino cannon maker
Gorō Nyūdō Masamune, mediaeval Japanese blacksmith
Modern
Elizabeth Brim, noted for feminine imagery of lingerie or shoes in her work, also for the Brim technique of inflating balloons of hot metal with compressed air
Roland Greefkes, wrought iron work
Paul Zimmermann, contemporary forge work

The term blade geometry refers to the physical properties of a sword blade: cross-section (or grind) and taper.
Blade geometry
Blade geometry is a crucial aspect of knife and sword design, influencing both the performance and usability of cutting tools.
Cross-section
The cross-section of a blade is the primary way of determining its function and place in history.
Early Middle Ages
Early Viking and medieval European blades tended to have a lenticular cross-section. This type of design lacks a strong central ridge in the middle of the blade. The flexibility these blades have illustrates the purpose that they served as primarily cutting weapons that could also be used for thrusting.
Late Middle Ages
With the improvement in the defensive capabilities of armor in the High and Late Middle Ages, the cross-section of the sword blade adapted to suit the needs of warriors. Swords began to favour rigidity over flexibility as more rigid blades allowed for the stronger thrusts that were used to pierce armour. These blades were made with a diamond cross-section, which could be more or less acute, depending on the purpose of the blade. Weapons such as the estoc, for example, would have little to no cutting edge, but they would be very rigid and strong on the thrust. This is opposed by the longsword which was usually a multi-purpose weapon used for both thrusting and cutting.
The diamond cross-section could also be hollow ground for greater edge sharpness and thrust efficiency, while retaining strong central ridges.
Taper
There are two types of physical blade taper: distal and profile.
Distal tapering refers to a blade's cross-section thinning from its base to its tip. This is used to create the handling characteristics of individual blades and the amount of distal taper varies depending upon the intended purpose of the blade. Many modern replica blades are not made with any distal taper, resulting in a blade that, when wielded, will feel unresponsive and heavy.
Profile taper refers to narrowing upon the edges of the flat of the blade. Blades with a more gradual taper are meant for cutting, whereas blades with an acute taper are usually meant for thrusting.

A blast furnace is a type of metallurgical furnace used for smelting to produce industrial metals, generally pig iron, but also others such as lead or copper. Blast refers to the combustion air being supplied above atmospheric pressure.
In a blast furnace, fuel (coke), ores, and flux (limestone) are continuously supplied through the top of the furnace, while a hot blast of (sometimes oxygen-enriched) air is blown into the lower section of the furnace through a series of pipes called tuyeres, so that the chemical reactions take place throughout the furnace as the material falls downward. The end products are usually molten metal and slag phases tapped from the bottom, and flue gases exiting from the top. The downward flow of the ore along with the flux in contact with an upflow of hot, carbon monoxide-rich combustion gases is a countercurrent exchange and chemical reaction process.
In contrast, air furnaces (such as reverberatory furnaces) are naturally aspirated, usually by the convection of hot gases in a chimney flue. According to this broad definition, bloomeries for iron, blowing houses for tin, and smelt mills for lead would be classified as blast furnaces. However, the term has usually been limited to those used for smelting iron ore to produce pig iron, an intermediate material used in the production of commercial iron and steel, and the shaft furnaces used in combination with sinter plants in base metals smelting.
Blast furnaces are estimated to have been responsible for over 4% of global greenhouse gas emissions between 1900 and 2015, and are difficult to decarbonize.
Process engineering and chemistry
Blast furnaces operate on the principle of chemical reduction whereby carbon monoxide converts iron oxides to elemental iron.
Blast furnaces differ from bloomeries and reverberatory furnaces in that in a blast furnace, flue gas is in direct contact with the ore and iron, allowing carbon monoxide to diffuse into the ore and reduce the iron oxide. The blast furnace operates as a countercurrent exchange process whereas a bloomery does not. Another difference is that bloomeries operate as a batch process whereas blast furnaces operate continuously for long periods. Continuous operation is also preferred because blast furnaces are difficult to start and stop. Also, the carbon in pig iron lowers the melting point below that of steel or pure iron; in contrast, iron does not melt in a bloomery.
Silica has to be removed from the pig iron. It reacts with calcium oxide (burned limestone) and forms silicates, which float to the surface of the molten pig iron as slag. Historically, iron was produced with charcoal to prevent sulfur contamination.
In a blast furnace, a downward-moving column of ore, flux, coke (or charcoal) and their reaction products must be sufficiently porous for the flue gas to pass through, upwards. To ensure this permeability the particle size of the coke or charcoal is of great relevance. Therefore, the coke must be strong enough so it will not be crushed by the weight of the material above it. Besides the physical strength of its particles, the coke must also be low in sulfur, phosphorus, and ash.
The main chemical reaction producing the molten iron is:
Fe2O3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO2
This reaction might be divided into multiple steps, with the first being that preheated air blown into the furnace reacts with the carbon in the form of coke to produce carbon monoxide and heat:
2 C(s) + O2(g) → 2 CO(g)
Hot carbon monoxide is the reducing agent for the iron ore and reacts with the iron oxide to produce molten iron and carbon dioxide. Depending on the temperature in the different parts of the furnace (warmest at the bottom) the iron is reduced in several steps. At the top, where the temperature usually is in the range between 200 °C and 700 °C, the iron oxide is partially reduced to iron(II,III) oxide, Fe3O4.
3 Fe2O3(s) + CO(g) → 2 Fe3O4(s) + CO2(g)
The temperatures 850 °C, further down in the furnace, the iron(II,III) is reduced further to iron(II) oxide:
Fe3O4(s) + CO(g) → 3 FeO(s) + CO2(g)
Hot carbon dioxide, unreacted carbon monoxide, and nitrogen from the air pass up through the furnace as fresh feed material travels down into the reaction zone. As the material travels downward, the counter-current gases both preheat the feed charge and decompose the limestone to calcium oxide and carbon dioxide:
CaCO3(s) → CaO(s) + CO2(g)
The calcium oxide formed by decomposition reacts with various acidic impurities in the iron (notably silica), to form a fayalitic slag which is essentially calcium silicate, CaSiO3:
SiO2 + CaO → CaSiO3
As the iron(II) oxide moves down to the area with higher temperatures, ranging up to 1200 °C degrees, it is reduced further to iron metal:
FeO(s) + CO(g) → Fe(s) + CO2(g)
The carbon dioxide formed in this process is re-reduced to carbon monoxide by the coke:
C(s) + CO2(g) → 2 CO(g)
The temperature-dependent equilibrium controlling the gas atmosphere in the furnace is called the Boudouard reaction:
2CO ⇌ CO2 + C
The pig iron produced by the blast furnace has a relatively high carbon content of around 4–5% and usually contains too much sulphur, making it very brittle, and of limited immediate commercial use. Some pig iron is used to make cast iron. The majority of pig iron produced by blast furnaces undergoes further processing to reduce the carbon and sulphur content and produce various grades of steel used for construction materials, automobiles, ships and machinery. Desulphurisation usually takes place during the transport of the liquid steel to the steelworks. This is done by adding calcium oxide, which reacts with the iron sulfide contained in the pig iron to form calcium sulfide (called lime desulfurization). In a further process step, the so-called basic oxygen steelmaking, the carbon is oxidized by blowing oxygen onto the liquid pig iron to form crude steel.
History
Cast iron has been found in China dating to the 5th century BC, but the earliest extant blast furnaces in China date to the 1st century AD and in the West from the High Middle Ages. They spread from the region around Namur in Wallonia (Belgium) in the late 15th century, being introduced to England in 1491. The fuel used in these was invariably charcoal. The successful substitution of coke for charcoal is widely attributed to British inventor Abraham Darby in 1709. The efficiency of the process was further enhanced by the practice of preheating the combustion air (hot blast), patented by British inventor James Beaumont Neilson in 1828.
China
Archaeological evidence shows that iron-smelting techniques and bloomeries were brought to China by nomadic peoples around 800 BC. Wrought iron artifacts were originally only found in the northwest, but by the 6th century BC, luxury items such as wrought iron swords and knives were widespread in China. Bloomery iron co-existed with blast furnaces and cast iron, which were invented shortly after wrought iron technology entered China, for quite some time. Cast iron pieces have been found alongside wrought iron in Shanxi Province dating to the 9th-8th centuries BC, however it is uncertain if these cast iron pieces were accidental byproducts of the iron smelting process. Adzes made using cast iron with a decarburised layer of steel have been found in Luoyang dating to the 5th century BC. Cast iron farming tools that had undergone an annealing process to decrease brittleness were found in burials and smelting cites dating to the 4th century BC. Bloomery iron disappeared in China after the 3rd century AD with the exception of Xinjiang, where bloomery iron objects could be found as late as the 9th century AD. In China, blast furnaces produced cast iron, which was then either converted into finished implements in a cupola furnace, or turned into wrought iron in a fining hearth.
Although cast iron farm tools and weapons were widespread in China by the 5th century BC, employing workforces of over 200 men in iron smelters from the 3rd century onward, the earliest blast furnaces constructed were attributed to the Han dynasty in the 1st century AD. These early furnaces had clay walls and used phosphorus-containing minerals as a flux. Chinese blast furnaces ranged from around two to ten meters in height, depending on the region. The largest ones were found in modern Sichuan and Guangdong, while the 'dwarf" blast furnaces were found in Dabieshan. In construction, they are both around the same level of technological sophistication.
The effectiveness of the Chinese human and horse powered blast furnaces was enhanced during this period by the engineer Du Shi (c. AD 31), who applied the power of waterwheels to piston-bellows in forging cast iron. Early water-driven reciprocators for operating blast furnaces were built according to the structure of horse powered reciprocators that already existed. That is, the circular motion of the wheel, be it horse driven or water driven, was transferred by the combination of a belt drive, a crank-and-connecting-rod, other connecting rods, and various shafts, into the reciprocal motion necessary to operate push bellows. Donald Wagner suggests that early blast furnace and cast iron production evolved from furnaces used to melt bronze. Certainly, though, iron was essential to military success by the time the State of Qin had unified China (221 BC). Usage of the blast and cupola furnace remained widespread during the Song and Tang dynasties. By the 11th century, the Song dynasty Chinese iron industry made a switch of resources from charcoal to coke in casting iron and steel, sparing thousands of acres of woodland from felling. This may have happened as early as the 4th century AD.
The primary advantage of the early blast furnace was in large scale production and making iron implements more readily available to peasants. Cast iron is more brittle than wrought iron or steel, which required additional fining and then cementation or co-fusion to produce, but for menial activities such as farming it sufficed. By using the blast furnace, it was possible to produce larger quantities of tools such as ploughshares more efficiently than the bloomery. In areas where quality was important, such as warfare, wrought iron and steel were preferred. Nearly all Han period weapons are made of wrought iron or steel, with the exception of axe-heads, of which many are made of cast iron.
Blast furnaces were also later used to produce gunpowder weapons such as cast iron bomb shells and cast iron cannons during the Song dynasty.
Medieval Europe
The simplest forge, known as the Corsican. Examples of improved bloomeries are the Stuckofen, sometimes called wolf-furnace, which remained until the beginning of the 19th century. Instead of using natural draught, air was pumped in by a trompe, resulting in better quality iron and an increased capacity. This pumping of air in with bellows is known as cold blast, and it increases the fuel efficiency of the bloomery and improves yield. They can also be built bigger than natural draught bloomeries.
Oldest European blast furnaces
The oldest known blast furnaces in the West were built in Durstel in Switzerland, the Märkische Sauerland in Germany, and at Lapphyttan in Sweden, where the complex was active between 1205 and 1300. At Noraskog in the Swedish parish of Järnboås, traces of even earlier blast furnaces have been found, possibly from around 1100. These early blast furnaces, like the Chinese examples, were very inefficient compared to those used today. The iron from the Lapphyttan complex was used to produce balls of wrought iron known as osmonds, and these were traded internationally – a possible reference occurs in a treaty with Novgorod from 1203 and several certain references in accounts of English customs from the 1250s and 1320s. Other furnaces of the 13th to 15th centuries have been identified in Westphalia.
The technology required for blast furnaces may have either been transferred from China, or may have been an indigenous innovation. Al-Qazvini in the 13th century and other travellers subsequently noted an iron industry in the Alburz Mountains to the south of the Caspian Sea. This is close to the silk route, so that the use of technology derived from China is conceivable. Much later descriptions record blast furnaces about three metres high. As the Varangian Rus' people from Scandinavia traded with the Caspian (using their Volga trade route), it is possible that the technology reached Sweden by this means. The Vikings are known to have used double bellows, which greatly increases the volumetric flow of the blast.
The Caspian region may also have been the source for the design of the furnace at Ferriere, described by Filarete, involving a water-powered bellows at Semogo in Valdidentro in northern Italy in 1226. In a two-stage process the molten iron was tapped twice a day into water, thereby granulating it.
Cistercian contributions
The General Chapter of the Cistercian monks spread some technological advances across Europe. This may have included the blast furnace, as the Cistercians are known to have been skilled metallurgists. According to Jean Gimpel, their high level of industrial technology facilitated the diffusion of new techniques: "Every monastery had a model factory, often as large as the church and only several feet away, and waterpower drove the machinery of the various industries located on its floor." Iron ore deposits were often donated to the monks along with forges to extract the iron, and after a time surpluses were offered for sale. The Cistercians became the leading iron producers in Champagne, France, from the mid-13th century to the 17th century, also using the phosphate-rich slag from their furnaces as an agricultural fertilizer.
Archaeologists are still discovering the extent of Cistercian technology. At Laskill, an outstation of Rievaulx Abbey and the only medieval blast furnace so far identified in Britain, the slag produced was low in iron content. Slag from other furnaces of the time contained a substantial concentration of iron, whereas Laskill is believed to have produced cast iron quite efficiently. Its date is not yet clear, but it probably did not survive until Henry VIII's Dissolution of the Monasteries in the late 1530s, as an agreement (immediately after that) concerning the "smythes" with the Earl of Rutland in 1541 refers to blooms. Nevertheless, the means by which the blast furnace spread in medieval Europe has not finally been determined.
Origin and spread of early modern blast furnaces
Due to the increased demand for iron for casting cannons, the blast furnace came into widespread use in France in the mid 15th century.
The direct ancestor of those used in France and England was in the Namur region, in what is now Wallonia (Belgium). From there, they spread first to the Pays de Bray on the eastern boundary of Normandy and from there to the Weald of Sussex, where the first furnace (called Queenstock) in Buxted was built in about 1491, followed by one at Newbridge in Ashdown Forest in 1496. They remained few in number until about 1530 but many were built in the following decades in the Weald, where the iron industry perhaps reached its peak about 1590. Most of the pig iron from these furnaces was taken to finery forges for the production of bar iron.
The first British furnaces outside the Weald appeared during the 1550s, and many were built in the remainder of that century and the following ones. The output of the industry probably peaked about 1620, and was followed by a slow decline until the early 18th century. This was apparently because it was more economic to import iron from Sweden and elsewhere than to make it in some more remote British locations. Charcoal that was economically available to the industry was probably being consumed as fast as the wood to make it grew.
The first blast furnace in Russia opened in 1637 near Tula and was called the Gorodishche Works. The blast furnace spread from there to central Russia and then finally to the Urals.
Coke blast furnaces
In 1709, at Coalbrookdale in Shropshire, England, Abraham Darby began to fuel a blast furnace with coke instead of charcoal. Coke's initial advantage was its lower cost, mainly because making coke required much less labor than cutting trees and making charcoal, but using coke also overcame localized shortages of wood, especially in Britain and elsewhere in Europe. Metallurgical grade coke will bear heavier weight than charcoal, allowing larger furnaces. A disadvantage is that coke contains more impurities than charcoal, with sulfur being especially detrimental to the iron's quality. Coke's impurities were more of a problem before hot blast reduced the amount of coke required and before furnace temperatures were hot enough to make slag from limestone free flowing. (Limestone ties up sulphur. Manganese may also be added to tie up sulphur.)
Coke iron was initially only used for foundry work, making pots and other cast iron goods. Foundry work was a minor branch of the industry, but Darby's son built a new furnace at nearby Horsehay, and began to supply the owners of finery forges with coke pig iron for the production of bar iron. Coke pig iron was by this time cheaper to produce than charcoal pig iron. The use of a coal-derived fuel in the iron industry was a key factor in the British Industrial Revolution. However, in many areas of the world charcoal was cheaper while coke was more expensive even after the Industrial Revolution: e. g., in the US charcoal-fueled iron production fell in share to about a half c. 1850 but still continued to increase in absolute terms until c. 1890, while in João Monlevade in the Brazilian Highlands charcoal-fired blast furnaces were built as late as the 1930s and only phased out in 2000.
Darby's original blast furnace has been archaeologically excavated and can be seen in situ at Coalbrookdale, part of the Ironbridge Gorge Museums. Cast iron from the furnace was used to make girders for the world's first cast iron bridge in 1779. The Iron Bridge crosses the River Severn at Coalbrookdale and remains in use for pedestrians.
Steam-powered blast
The steam engine was applied to power blast air, overcoming a shortage of water power in areas where coal and iron ore were located. This was first done at Coalbrookdale where a steam engine replaced a horse-powered pump in 1742. Such engines were used to pump water to a reservoir above the furnace. The first engines used to blow cylinders directly was supplied by Boulton and Watt to John Wilkinson's New Willey Furnace. This powered a cast iron blowing cylinder, which had been invented by his father Isaac Wilkinson. He patented such cylinders in 1736, to replace the leather bellows, which wore out quickly. Isaac was granted a second patent, also for blowing cylinders, in 1757. The steam engine and cast iron blowing cylinder led to a large increase in British iron production in the late 18th century.
Hot blast
Hot blast was the single most important advance in fuel efficiency of the blast furnace and was one of the most important technologies developed during the Industrial Revolution. Hot blast was patented by James Beaumont Neilson at Wilsontown Ironworks in Britain in 1828. Within a few years of the introduction, hot blast was developed to the point where fuel consumption was cut by one-third using coke or two-thirds using coal, while furnace capacity was also significantly increased. Within a few decades, the practice was to have a "stove" as large as the furnace next to it into which the waste gas (containing CO) from the furnace was directed and burnt. The resultant heat was used to preheat the air blown into the furnace. Hot blast enabled the use of raw anthracite coal, which was difficult to light, in the blast furnace. Anthracite was first tried successfully by George Crane at Ynyscedwyn Ironworks in south Wales in 1837. It was taken up in America by the Lehigh Crane Iron Company at Catasauqua, Pennsylvania, in 1839. Anthracite use declined when very high capacity blast furnaces requiring coke were built in the 1870s.
Modern applications of the blast furnace
Iron blast furnaces
The blast furnace remains an important part of modern iron production. Modern furnaces are highly efficient, including Cowper stoves to pre-heat the blast air and employ recovery systems to extract the heat from the hot gases exiting the furnace. Competition in industry drives higher production rates. The largest blast furnace in the world is in South Korea, with a volume around 6,000 m3 (210,000 cu ft). It can produce around 5,650,000 tonnes (5,560,000 LT) of iron per year.
This is a great increase from the typical 18th-century furnaces, which averaged about 360 tonnes (350 long tons; 400 short tons) per year. Variations of the blast furnace, such as the Swedish electric blast furnace, have been developed in countries which have no native coal resources.
According to Global Energy Monitor, the blast furnace is likely to become obsolete to meet climate change objectives of reducing carbon dioxide emission, but BHP disagrees. An alternative process involving direct reduced iron (DRI) is likely to succeed it, but this also needs to use a blast furnace to melt the iron and remove the gangue (impurities) unless the ore is very high quality.
Oxygen blast furnace
The oxygen blast furnace (OBF) process, developed from the 1970s to the 1990s, has been extensively studied theoretically because of the potentials of promising energy conservation and CO2 emission reduction. This type may be the most suitable for use with CCS. The main blast furnace has of three levels; the reduction zone (523–973 K (250–700 °C; 482–1,292 °F)), slag formation zone (1,073–1,273 K (800–1,000 °C; 1,472–1,832 °F)), and the combustion zone (1,773–1,873 K (1,500–1,600 °C; 2,732–2,912 °F)).
OBFs are usually combined with top gas recycling. The problem with this, besides significant oxygen expenditures, is the uneven distribution of gas recycled from the top of the furnace to the middle, which collides with the hot gas from below. As of 2023, the technology is only practiced on the experimental level in Sweden, Japan and China.
Blast furnaces in copper and lead smelting
Blast furnaces are currently rarely used in copper smelting, but modern lead smelting blast furnaces are much shorter than iron blast furnaces and are rectangular in shape. Modern lead blast furnaces are constructed using water-cooled steel or copper jackets for the walls, and have no refractory linings in the side walls. The base of the furnace is a hearth of refractory material (bricks or castable refractory). Lead blast furnaces are often open-topped rather than having the charging bell used in iron blast furnaces.
The blast furnace used at the Nyrstar Port Pirie lead smelter differs from most other lead blast furnaces in that it has a double row of tuyeres rather than the single row normally used. The lower shaft of the furnace has a chair shape with the lower part of the shaft being narrower than the upper. The lower row of tuyeres being located in the narrow part of the shaft. This allows the upper part of the shaft to be wider than the standard.
Zinc blast furnaces
The blast furnaces used in the Imperial Smelting Process ("ISP") were developed from the standard lead blast furnace, but are fully sealed. This is because the zinc produced by these furnaces is recovered as metal from the vapor phase, and the presence of oxygen in the off-gas would result in the formation of zinc oxide.
Blast furnaces used in the ISP have a more intense operation than standard lead blast furnaces, with higher air blast rates per m2 of hearth area and a higher coke consumption.
Zinc production with the ISP is more expensive than with electrolytic zinc plants, so several smelters operating this technology have closed in recent years. However, ISP furnaces have the advantage of being able to treat zinc concentrates containing higher levels of lead than can electrolytic zinc plants.
Manufacture of stone wool
Stone wool or rock wool is a spun mineral fibre used as an insulation product and in hydroponics. It is manufactured in a blast furnace fed with diabase rock which contains very low levels of metal oxides. The resultant slag is drawn off and spun to form the rock wool product. Very small amounts of metals are also produced which are an unwanted by-product.
Modern iron process
Modern furnaces are equipped with an array of supporting facilities to increase efficiency, such as ore storage yards where barges are unloaded. The raw materials are transferred to the stockhouse complex by ore bridges, or rail hoppers and ore transfer cars. Rail-mounted scale cars or computer controlled weight hoppers weigh out the various raw materials to yield the desired hot metal and slag chemistry. The raw materials are brought to the top of the blast furnace via a skip car powered by winches or conveyor belts.
There are different ways in which the raw materials are charged into the blast furnace. Some blast furnaces use a "double bell" system where two "bells" are used to control the entry of raw material into the blast furnace. The purpose of the two bells is to minimize the loss of hot gases in the blast furnace. First, the raw materials are emptied into the upper or small bell which then opens to empty the charge into the large bell. The small bell then closes, to seal the blast furnace, while the large bell rotates to provide specific distribution of materials before dispensing the charge into the blast furnace. A more recent design is to use a "bell-less" system. These systems use multiple hoppers to contain each raw material, which is then discharged into the blast furnace through valves. These valves are more accurate at controlling how much of each constituent is added, as compared to the skip or conveyor system, thereby increasing the efficiency of the furnace. Some of these bell-less systems also implement a discharge chute in the throat of the furnace (as with the Paul Wurth top) in order to precisely control where the charge is placed.
The iron making blast furnace itself is built in the form of a tall structure, lined with refractory brick, and profiled to allow for expansion of the charged materials as they heat during their descent, and subsequent reduction in size as melting starts to occur. Coke, limestone flux, and iron ore (iron oxide) are charged into the top of the furnace in a precise filling order which helps control gas flow and the chemical reactions inside the furnace. Four "uptakes" allow the hot, dirty gas high in carbon monoxide content to exit the furnace throat, while "bleeder valves" protect the top of the furnace from sudden gas pressure surges. The coarse particles in the exhaust gas settle in the "dust catcher" and are dumped into a railroad car or truck for disposal, while the gas itself flows through a venturi scrubber and/or electrostatic precipitators and a gas cooler to reduce the temperature of the cleaned gas.
The "casthouse" at the bottom half of the furnace begins with the "bosh": that portion of the blast furnace above the tuyeres and below the stack. Shaped like an inverted, truncated cone, it is the part of the blast furnace where ore turns molten. Next is the bustle pipe (a large-diameter annular pipe to deliver heated air under pressure to the tuyeres) and the equipment for casting the liquid iron and slag. Once a "taphole" is drilled through the refractory clay plug, liquid iron and slag flow down a trough through a "skimmer" opening, separating the iron and slag. Modern, larger blast furnaces may have as many as four tapholes and two casthouses. Once the pig iron and slag has been tapped, the taphole is again plugged with refractory clay.
The tuyeres are used to implement a hot blast, which is used to increase the efficiency of the blast furnace. The hot blast is directed into the furnace through water-cooled copper nozzles called tuyeres near the base. The hot blast temperature can be from 900 to 1,300 °C (1,650 to 2,370 °F) depending on the stove design and condition. The temperatures they deal with may be 2,000 to 2,300 °C (3,630 to 4,170 °F). Oil, tar, natural gas, powdered coal and oxygen can also be injected into the furnace at tuyere level to combine with the coke to release additional energy and increase the percentage of reducing gases present which is necessary to increase productivity.
The exhaust gasses of a blast furnace are generally cleaned in the dust collector – such as an inertial separator, a baghouse, or an electrostatic precipitator. Each type of dust collector has strengths and weaknesses – some collect fine particles, some coarse particles, some collect electrically charged particles. Effective exhaust clearing relies on multiple stages of treatment. Waste heat is usually collected from the exhaust gases, for example by the use of a Cowper stove, a variety of heat exchanger.
Environmental impact
Fossil fuel (coke, natural gas) use in blast furnaces is a source of greenhouse gas emissions and the blast furnace is the most emission intensive stage of the steel making process. Fuels and reductants such as plastic waste, biomass and hydrogen are being used by steelmakers as possible alternatives to fossil fuels, although cost and availability remain a challenge and deployment is limited.
Electric arc furnaces (EAF) are cited as an alternative steel production path which avoids the use of blast furnaces, however, depending on the characteristics of the steel product required the two furnace types are not always interchangeable. Furthermore, EAFs utilize steel scrap as a feedstock but estimates suggest that there will not be enough scrap available to meet future steel demand. Using hydrogen gas as a reductant to produce DRI (so called H2-DRI) from iron ore, which is then used as a feedstock for an EAF provides a technologically feasible, low emission alternative to blast furnaces. The H2-DRI EAF production route is in a fledgling state, with just one plant in operation.
ULCOS (Ultra Low CO2 Steelmaking) was a European programme exploring processes to reduce blast furnace emissions by at least 50%. Technologies identified include carbon capture and storage (CCS) and alternative energy sources and reductants such as hydrogen, electricity and biomass.
Carbon capture, utilisation, and storage (CCUS)
For existing blast furnaces, carbon capture, utilisation, and storage (CCUS) is a potential solution to abate emissions. This involves capturing CO2 from the furnace's waste gases before they are released, and then either transporting it for permanent underground storage (CCS) or using it to create other products (CCU). As of early 2025, no commercial-scale CCUS facility is in full operation on a primary steelmaking plant. However, several large-scale pilot and demonstration projects are underway. The high costs, estimated at $50 to $100 per tonne of CO2 for industrial sources, and the lack of transport and storage infrastructure remain significant barriers to widespread deployment.
Preserved historic blast furnaces
Historically it was normal procedure for a decommissioned blast furnace to be demolished and either replaced with a newer, improved one, or to have the entire site demolished and treated for follow-up use of the area. In recent decades, several countries have realized the historic value of blast furnaces and have transformed them into museums. Examples can be found in the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Japan, Luxembourg, Poland, Romania, Mexico, Russia, Spain, United Kingdom, and United States.
Gallery

A blast gate is a gate valve used to focus a dust collection system's vacuum pressure for maximum dust (or other material) extraction at the desired location. Blast gates are positioned near individual pieces of machinery and operate by being closed by default, blocking air flow. When one blast gate is opened, all available suction is focused at that location, maximizing the amount of material collected.
In larger dust collection system installations with more available power, multiple blast gates may be opened at the same time without detriment to collection abilities at individual locations. Some systems are so powerful that at least one blast gate must be open at all times, or the system can collapse itself.

A bloomery is a type of metallurgical furnace once used widely for smelting iron from its oxides. The bloomery was the earliest form of smelter capable of smelting iron. Bloomeries produce a porous mass of iron and slag called a bloom. The mix of slag and iron in the bloom, termed sponge iron, is usually consolidated and further forged into wrought iron. Blast furnaces, which produce pig iron, have largely superseded bloomeries.
Process
A bloomery consists of a pit or chimney with heat-resistant walls made of earth, clay, or stone. Near the bottom, one or more pipes (made of clay or metal) enter through the side walls. These pipes, called tuyeres, allow air to enter the furnace, either by natural draught or forced with bellows or a trompe. An opening at the bottom of the bloomery may be used to remove the bloom, or the bloomery can be tipped over and the bloom removed from the top.
The first step taken before the bloomery can be used is the preparation of the charcoal and the iron ore. Charcoal is nearly pure carbon, which, when burned, both produces the high temperature needed for the smelting process and provides the carbon monoxide needed for reduction of the metal.
The ore is broken into small pieces and usually roasted in a fire, to make rock-based ores easier to break up, bake out some impurities, and (to a lesser extent) to remove any moisture in the ore. Any large impurities (as silica) in the ore can be removed as it is crushed. The desired particle size depends primarily on which of several ore types may be available, which will also have a relationship to the layout and operation of the furnace, of which a number of regional, historic/traditional forms exist. Natural iron ores can vary considerably in oxide form (Fe2O3 / Fe3O4 / FeO(OH)), and importantly in relative iron content. Since slag from previous blooms may have a high iron content, it can also be broken up and may be recycled into the bloomery with the new ore.
In operation, after the bloomery is heated typically with a wood fire, shifting to burning sized charcoal, iron ore and additional charcoal are introduced through the top. Again, traditional methods vary, but normally smaller charges of ore are added at the start of the main smelting sequence, increasing to larger amounts as the smelt progresses. Overall, a typical ratio of total charcoal to ore added is in a roughly one-to-one ratio. Inside the furnace, carbon monoxide from the incomplete combustion of the charcoal reduces the iron oxides in the ore to metallic iron without melting the ore; this allows the bloomery to operate at lower temperatures than the melting temperature of the ore. As the desired product of a bloomery is iron that is easily forgeable, it requires a low carbon content. The temperature and ratio of charcoal to iron ore must be carefully controlled to keep the iron from absorbing too much carbon and thus becoming unforgeable. Cast iron occurs when the iron absorbs 2% to 4% carbon. Because the bloomery is self-fluxing, the addition of limestone is not required to form a slag.
The small particles of iron produced in this way fall to the bottom of the furnace, where they combine with molten slag, often consisting of fayalite, a compound of silicon, oxygen, and iron mixed with other impurities from the ore. The hot liquid slag, running to the bottom of the furnace, cools against the base and lower side walls of the furnace, effectively forming a bowl still containing fluid slag. As the individual iron particles form, they fall into this bowl and sinter together under their own weight, forming a spongy mass referred to as the bloom. Because the bloom is typically porous, and its open spaces can be full of slag, the extracted mass must be beaten with heavy hammers to both compress voids and drive out any molten slag remaining. This process may require several additional heating and compaction cycles, working at high 'welding' temperatures. Iron treated this way is said to be wrought (worked), and the resulting iron, with reduced amounts of slag, is called wrought iron or bar iron. Because of the creation process, individual blooms can often have differing carbon contents between the original top and bottom surfaces, differences that will also be somewhat blended together through the flattening, folding, and hammer-welding sequences. Intentionally producing blooms that are coated in steel (i.e. iron with a higher carbon content) by manipulating the charge of and air flow to the bloomery is also possible.
As the era of modern commercial steelmaking began, the word "bloom" was extended to another sense referring to an intermediate-stage piece of steel, of a size comparable to many traditional iron blooms, that was ready to be further worked into billet.
History
The onset of the Iron Age in most parts of the world coincides with the first widespread use of the bloomery. While earlier examples of iron are found, their high nickel content indicates that this is meteoric iron. Other early samples of iron may have been produced by accidental introduction of iron ore in copper-smelting operations. Iron appears to have been smelted in the Middle East as early as 3000 BC, but coppersmiths, not being familiar with iron, did not put it to use until much later. In the West, iron began to be used around 1200 BC.
East Asia
China has long been considered the exception to the general use of bloomeries. The Chinese are thought to have skipped the bloomery process completely, starting with the blast furnace and the finery forge to produce wrought iron; by the fifth century BC, metalworkers in the southern state of Wu had invented the blast furnace and the means to both cast iron and to decarburize the carbon-rich pig iron produced in a blast furnace to a low-carbon, wrought iron-like material. Recent evidence, however, shows that bloomeries were used earlier in ancient China, migrating in from the west as early as 800 BC, before being supplanted by the locally developed blast furnace. Supporting this theory was the discovery of "more than ten" iron-digging implements found in the tomb of Duke Jing of Qin (d. 537 BC), whose tomb is located in Fengxiang County, Shaanxi (a museum exists on the site today).
Sub-Saharan Africa
The earliest records of bloomery-type furnaces in East Africa are discoveries of smelted iron and carbon in Nubia in ancient Sudan dated at least to the seventh to the sixth century BC. The ancient bloomeries that produced metal tools for the Nubians and Kushites produced a surplus for sale. All traditional sub-Saharan African iron-smelting processes are variants of the bloomery process. There is considerable discussion about the origins of iron metallurgy in Africa. Smelting in bloomery type furnaces in West Africa and forging of tools appeared in the Nok culture of central Nigeria by at least 550 BC and possibly several centuries earlier. Also, evidence indicates iron smelting with bloomery-style furnaces dated to 750 BC in Opi (Augustin Holl 2009) and Lejja dated to 2,000 BC (Pamela Eze-Uzomaka 2009), both sites in the Nsukka region of southeast Nigeria in what is now Igboland. The site of Gbabiri, in the Central African Republic, has also yielded evidence of iron metallurgy, from a reduction furnace and blacksmith workshop, with earliest dates of 896–773 and 907–796 BC, respectively.
South Asia
During a hydroelectric plant project, in the southern foothills of the Central Highlands, Samanalawewa, in Sri Lanka, a wind-driven furnace was found in an excavation site. Such furnaces were powered by the monsoon winds and have been dated to 300 BC using radiocarbon-dating techniques. These ancient Lankan furnaces might have produced the best-quality steel for legendary Damascus swords as referred in earlier Syrian records. Field trials using replica furnaces confirmed that this furnace type uses a wind-based air-supply principle that is distinct from either forced or natural draught, and show also that they are capable of producing high-carbon steel.
Wrought iron was used in the construction of monuments such as the iron pillar of Delhi, built in the third century AD during the Gupta Empire. The latter was built using a towering series of disc-shaped iron blooms. Similar to China, high-carbon steel was eventually used in India, although cast iron was not used for architecture until modern times.
Early to medieval Europe
Early European bloomeries were relatively small, primarily due to the mechanical limits of human-powered bellows and the amount of force possible to apply with hand-driven sledge hammers. Those known archaeologically from the pre-Roman Iron Age tend to be in the 2 kg range, produced in low shaft furnaces. Roman-era production often used furnaces tall enough to create a natural draft effect (into the range of 200 cm tall), and increasing bloom sizes into the range of 10–15 kg. Contemporary experimenters had routinely made blooms using Northern European-derived "short-shaft" furnaces with blown air supplies in the 5–10 kg range The use of waterwheels, spreading around the turn of the first millennium and used to power more massive bellows, allowed the bloomery to become larger and hotter, with associated trip hammers allowing the consolidation forging of the larger blooms created. Progressively larger bloomeries were constructed in the late 14th century, with a capacity of about 15 kg on average, though exceptions did exist. European average bloom sizes quickly rose to 300 kg, where they levelled off until the demise of the bloomery.
As a bloomery's size is increased, the iron ore is exposed to burning charcoal for a longer time. When combined with the strong air blast required to penetrate the large ore and charcoal stack, this may cause part of the iron to melt and become saturated with carbon in the process, producing unforgeable pig iron, which requires oxidation to be reduced into cast iron, steel, and iron. This pig iron was considered a waste product detracting from the largest bloomeries' yield, and early blast furnaces, identical in construction, but dedicated to the production of molten iron, were not built until the 14th century.
Bloomery type furnaces typically produced a range of iron products from very low-carbon iron to steel containing around 0.2–1.5% carbon. The master smith had to select pieces of low-carbon iron, carburize them, and pattern-weld them together to make steel sheets. Even when applied to a noncarburized bloom, this pound, fold, and weld process resulted in a more homogeneous product and removed much of the slag. The process had to be repeated up to 15 times when high-quality steel was needed, as for a sword. The alternative was to carburize the surface of a finished product. Each welding's heat oxidises some carbon, so the master smith had to make sure enough carbon was in the starting mixture.
In England and Wales, despite the arrival of the blast furnace in the Weald in about 1491, bloomery forges, probably using waterpower for the hammer and the bellows, were operating in the West Midlands region beyond 1580. In Furness and Cumberland, they operated into the early 17th century and the last one in England (near Garstang) did not close until about 1770.
One of the oldest-known blast furnaces in Europe has been found in Lapphyttan in Sweden, carbon-14 dated to be from the 12th century. The oldest bloomery in Sweden, also found in the same area, has been carbon-14 dated to 700 BC.
Bloomeries survived in Spain and southern France as Catalan forges into the mid-19th century, and in Austria as the Stückofen to 1775.
The Americas
Iron smelting was rare in pre-Columbian America.
Excavations at L'Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland, have found considerable evidence for the processing of bog iron and the production of iron in a bloomery by the Norse. The cluster of Viking Age (c. 1000–1022 AD) at L'Anse aux Meadows are situated on a raised marine terrace, between a sedge peat bog and the ocean. Estimates from the smaller amount of slag recovered archaeologically suggest 15 kg of slag was produced during what appears to have been a single smelting attempt. By comparing the iron content of the primary bog iron ore found in the purpose built 'furnace hut' with the iron remaining in that slag, an estimated 3 kg iron bloom was produced. At a yield of at best 20% from what is a good iron rich ore, this suggests the workers processing the ore had not been particularly skilled. This supports the idea that iron processing knowledge was widespread and not restricted to major centers of trade and commerce. Archaeologists also found 98 nail, and importantly, ship rivet fragments, at the site as well as considerable evidence for woodworking – which points to boat or possibly ship repairs being undertaken at the site.
In the Spanish colonization of the Americas, bloomeries or "Catalan forges" were part of "self-sufficiency" at some of the missions, encomiendas, and pueblos. As part of the Franciscan Spanish missions in Alta California, the "Catalan forges" at Mission San Juan Capistrano from the 1790s are the oldest existing facilities of their kind in the present day state of California. The bloomeries' sign proclaims the site as being "part of Orange County's first industrial complex".
The archaeology at Jamestown Virginia (circa 1610–1615) had recovered the remains of a simple short-shaft bloomery furnace, likely intended as yet another "resource test" like the one in Vinland much earlier.
Colonial New England
There are some who propose that the English settlers of the Thirteen Colonies were prevented by law from manufacture; and that for a time, the British sought to situate most of the skilled artisanry at domestic locations. The Falling Creek Ironworks was the first in the United States. The Neabsco Iron Works is an example of the early Virginian effort to form a workable American industry.
In fact, there is a long history of colonial ironworks in Braintree and Saugus, Massachusetts and, notably, by the extended Leonard family in and around Taunton, Massachusetts. Taunton Iron Works was first organized in 1652 by James Leonard and 45 investors and by 1656 produced 20 to 30 tons of iron per year. James was the scion of an early industrial family of Massachusetts—in the 17th and 18th century New England colonists said “Where you find ironworks, there you will find a Leonard.”
While some may contend that the iron industry was contested by the British, the Crown may have cultured the industry in favor for Loyalist to the crown. A case in fact would be James Leonard's grandson Daniel Leonard, a Loyalist raised by slaves after his mother died in childbirth who was made judge Mandamus during the American Revolution. In a historical exchange of opinion columns published in competing Boston newspapers Daniel Leonard, writing under the pen name "Massachusettensis" argued in support of the King of England against the letters of John Adams who wrote as "Novanglus" in support of revolution. Daniel's father Col. Ephraim Leonard "who, in 1734, erected his iron works on the Canoe River. The works were assessed for five hundred pounds.He was, without doubt, the wealthiest man in the North Precinct" and owned and gifted over 12 slaves and lived on a 1,200 acre estate near the East Mansfield Common in Massachusetts.
The earliest iron forge in colonial Pennsylvania was Thomas Rutter's bloomery near Pottstown, founded in 1716. In the Adirondacks, New York, new bloomeries using the hot blast technique were built in the 19th century.
Oceania
The first commercially smelted iron in Australia, was made at the Fitzroy Iron Works, using a Catalan forge, in 1848.
In New Zealand, a sophisticated direct-reduction furnace was used to smelt iron sand, at the Onehunga Ironworks, in 1883.

Blue goo is a sticky, plasticky, blueish-grey, clay-textured soil derived from a highly weathered serpentinite mélange. The name derives from the soil's color; a result of undergoing anaerobic conditions and becoming gleyed. A greyer variation is called "grey goo". Blue goo is primarily found along the Northern California coast.
Parent material
The Franciscan Complex is the bedrock from which blue goo is derived. It stretches along the coastline from Central California up to Southern Oregon and contains sheared materials from both the Pacific and North American Plates that have accumulated in the accretionary wedge.
The rock types that produce blue goo include: greenstones, cherts, basalts, shales, sandstones, schists, and serpenitites. These materials mixed together forming a "plum pudding" or a mélange. This mélange decomposed through weathering to form blue goo.
Common features
Clay soils like blue goo have the highest water-holding capacity when compared with other soils, giving them a low draining capacity. This kind of habitat is unsuitable for most plants, but the Northern California coastline maintains high levels of vegetation year round.
Due to blue goo's clayey texture, it slips when overly saturated. This slippage is increased in heavy rainfall areas and in shallow soils; deep soils have more total pore space and are not as prone to slippage. These features contribute to the landslide-ridden environments found along the Northern Californian coast.
Locations
The Franciscan Complex, from which blue goo is derived, extends from Central California up the coast through parts of Southern Oregon. But blue goo has only been found in two Northern Californian regions located in Humboldt County: the Trinidad region and the Orick region. Blue goo is thought to also be found in the Eel River region and along the Southern Oregon coastline.

Blueberry site is an archaeological site of an American Indian culture called Belle Glade culture, which lasted roughly 2700 years (approximately 1000 B.C. to A.D. 1700). The site is located along the eastern edge of an upland ridge adjacent to a substantial wetland in southeast Highlands County, Florida. Archaeological research on the site started in the early 1930s.
Cultural and Temporal Context
The temporal span of Belle Glade culture, in general, can be divided into four periods: Belle Glade I from 1000 B.C. to A.D. 200, Belle Glade II from A.D.200 to A.D. 600 or 800, Belle Glade III from A.D. 600 or 800 to A.D. 1200 or 1400, Belle Glade IV from A.D.1200 or 1400 to A.D. 1700. Archaeologists made these divisions based on varying factors including settlement patterns and landscape alternations. Serving as an indicator, an intact cultural stratum demonstrated the integrity and continuity of the primary Belle Glade occupation. Construction commonly took place during the primary occupation period, including at least three earthen mounds and at least one linear ridge/embankment/occupation mound. Under the consideration of the viability of the diverse landscape, the Blueberry site might be of a village size. It is not very likely to be an isolated community.
With the discovery of exotic artifacts and analysis of the hearth features, archaeologists believe that the residents at the Blueberry site developed trade networks with distant groups. Moreover, according to the Fort Centre site within the Belle Glade region, the exotic artifacts were likely to be possessed by elites, so the Belle Glade culture probably view the items from long-distant importation as prestige ones. Besides prestige items, inhabitants on the Blueberry site shared cultural similarities with other groups of American Indians. Studying the red ocher recovered from the midden stratum and the ceramics, rituals, and ceremony had a lot in common. Meanwhile, the analysis of hearth samples and the faunal assemblage proved the consistent subsistence strategy over time. The Belle Glade communities harvested aquatic resources such as fish and turtles as well as upland resources such as deer and turkey.
Case Study
To figure out the influence of geomorphological characteristics of the landscape on human behavior, in 2014, archaeologists conducted a case study on the Blueberry site. They studied lithic assemblages to see how Belle Glade inhabitants on the Blueberry site dealt with environmental constraints since this site lacked available lithic raw materials. From the diagnostic lithics recovered from the midden matrix, the archaeologists concluded that a lot of nearly complete tools were imported to the site. They also found evidence of Blueberry lithic manufacture at a late stage. The lithic assemblages supported the hypothesis that Pecora’s Reduction Juncture Model can describe the Blueberry site. However, they did not agree with Pecora that in a region of devoid tool-stone source, there would be a sequence of reduction relative to local resource.

Bog iron is a form of impure iron deposit that develops in bogs or swamps by the chemical or biochemical oxidation of iron carried in solution. In general, bog ores consist primarily of iron oxyhydroxides, commonly goethite (FeO(OH)), and related limonite.
Iron-bearing groundwater typically emerges as a spring and the iron in it forms ferric hydroxide upon encountering the oxidizing environment of the surface. Bog ore often combines goethite and magnetite, and may include vugs and stained quartz. Oxidation may occur through enzyme catalysis by iron bacteria. It is not clear whether the magnetite precipitates upon the first contact with oxygen, then oxidizes to ferric compounds, or whether the ferric compounds are reduced when exposed to anoxic conditions upon burial beneath the sediment surface and reoxidized upon exhumation at the surface.
Bog iron, like other hydrous iron oxides, has a specific affinity for heavy metals. This affinity combined with the porous structure and high specific surface area of bog iron make it a good natural sorbent. These properties combined with the fact that bog iron is cheap to obtain are incentives for its utilization in environmental protection technologies.
Iron made from bog ore will often contain residual silicates, which can form a glassy coating that imparts some resistance to rusting.
Formation
Iron is carried to bogs in low-pH, low-dissolved oxygen iron-bearing groundwater that reaches the surface through springs, along with structures of fractures, or where groundwater intersects surface flows. The iron in the water is then oxidized by dissolved oxygen or, through enzyme catalysis by iron bacteria (e.g., Thiobacillus ferrooxidans and Thiobacillus thiooxidans) that concentrate the iron as part of their life processes. Presence of these bacteria can be detected by the oily film they leave on the surface of the water. This change of oxidation state causes the precipitation of fine-grained iron solids near the point of groundwater discharge. A variety of iron minerals, such as goethite, magnetite, hematite, schwertmannite, and amorphous iron-aluminum-sulfate-rich solids, can be formed via oxidation of ferrous iron under the acidic conditions present. All photosynthesizers play dual roles as oxygen producers, and thus passive iron oxidizers, and as surfaces to which the iron can sorb or bind. This causes aquatic plants to become heavily encrusted with a light-orange floc of iron oxyhydroxide near the point of oxygen gas released from the plants. Factors such as local geology, parent rock mineralogy, ground-water composition, and geochemically active microbes and plants influence the formation, growth, and persistence of iron bogs. Bog iron is a renewable resource; the same bog can be harvested about once each generation.
Iron extraction
Europeans developed iron smelting from bog iron during the Pre-Roman Iron Age of the 5th/4th–1st centuries BCE, and most iron of the Viking Age (late first millennium CE) was smelted from bog iron. Humans can process bog iron with limited technology, since it does not have to be molten to remove many impurities. Due to its easy accessibility and reducibility, bog iron was commonly used for early iron production. Early metallurgists identified bog-iron deposits by indicators such as withered grass, a wet environment, hygrophilous grass-dominated vegetation, and reddish-brown solutions or depositions in nearby waters. They stabbed wooden or metal sticks into the ground to detect larger ore-deposits, and cut and pulled back layers of peat in the bog using turf knives to extract smaller, pea-sized nodules of bog iron. Early iron-production from bog ore mostly occurred in bloomery furnaces. The resources necessary for production were wood for charcoal, clay for the construction of bloomery furnaces, and water for processing. Iron in the ore is reduced to a spongy iron bloom that stays in the upper part of the furnace while the undesirable elements stream downwards as slag. Smelting with a bloomery furnace often results in between 10 and 20 mass percent Fe being reduced to iron bloom, while the rest is transferred into the slag. The bloom must then be consolidated with a hammer to make usable wrought iron. There is some archaeological evidence that lime was added to furnaces to treat silica-rich ores that were difficult to smelt by the bloomery process.
Europe
The first iron smelting attempts date to the 2nd millennium BCE in the Near East. The technology then spread throughout Europe in the following two millennia, reaching Poland in the 2nd century BCE. Iron production reached Scandinavia around 800–500 BCE. Iron production sites in central Sweden are dated to the late Bronze Age and the innovation might have been transmitted from both the south and the east. The ore used was limonite in the form of red soil and bog ore. From 200 CE ore from limonite-deposits in lakes was used. The ore was reduced in bloomeries. There is evidence of a direct relationship between Viking settlements in northern Europe and North America and bog iron deposits. Bog iron dominated the iron production of Norse populated areas, including Scandinavia and Finland, from 500 to 1300 CE. Large scale production of bog iron was also established in Iceland at sites known as "iron farms". Smaller scale production sites in Iceland consisted of large farmsteads and some original Icelandic settlements, but these seemed to only produce enough iron to be self-sufficient. Even after improved smelting technology made mined ores viable during the Middle Ages, bog ore remained important into modern times, particularly in peasant iron production. In Russia, bog ore was the principal source of iron until the 16th century, when the superior ores of the Ural Mountains became available.
North America
Pre-Columbian
Iron was produced by the Vikings on Newfoundland around 1021 CE. Excavations at L'Anse aux Meadows have found considerable evidence for the processing of bog iron and the production of iron ore. The settlement at L'Anse aux Meadows was situated immediately east of a sedge peat bog and 15 kg of slag was found at the site, which would have produced around 3 kg of usable iron. Analysis of the slag showed that considerably more iron could have been smelted out of the ore, indicating that the workers processing the ore had not been skilled. This supports the idea that iron processing knowledge was widespread and not restricted to major centers of trade and commerce. Ninety-eight nail fragments were also found at the site as well as considerable evidence for woodworking which points to the iron produced at the site possibly being used only for ship repair and not tool making.
Colonial North America
Bog iron was widely sought in colonial North America. The earliest known iron mines in North America are the mines from St. John's, Newfoundland, reportedly in operation by Anthony Parkhurst in 1578. The first mining efforts in Virginia occurred as early as 1608. In 1619 Falling Creek Ironworks was established in Chesterfield County, Virginia. It was the location of the first blast furnace facility in North America.
Lake Massapoag in Massachusetts was drawn down by deepening the outlet channel in a search for bog iron. The Saugus Iron Works National Historic Site, on the Saugus River in Saugus, Massachusetts, operated between 1646 and 1668. The site contains a museum and several reconstructed buildings. The success of the Saugus Iron Works, and the rapid depletion of the region's natural bog iron, led the owners to send prospectors into the surrounding countryside. In 1658 the company bought 1,600 acres (6.5 km2) of land which covered areas that are now Concord, Acton, and Sudbury. They set up a large production facility in Concord, Massachusetts, along the Assabet River with dams, ponds, watercourses, and hearths, but by 1694 the natural bog iron there had also been exhausted, and the land was sold for farming.
In Central and Southern New Jersey, bog ore was mined and refined for the production of naturally rust-resistant tools and wrought iron rails, many of which still grace staircases in Trenton and Camden. During the American Revolution, bog iron cannonballs were cast for the colonial forces.
19th century United States
Bog iron was also found on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. The remains of a commercial smelting operation near Snow Hill, Maryland, are now a state and national historic site. Known as Furnace Town, it was called the Nassawango Iron Furnace after the nearby creek. The commercial furnace ran from about 1825 to 1850.
The Shapleigh Iron Company constructed a smelter at North Shapleigh, Maine, in 1836 to exploit a small bog iron deposit in Little Ossipee Pond. The plant commenced operation in 1837, but according to an 1854 history of Shapleigh "the business [proved] unprofitable, therefore after a few years it was abandoned."

Bolas or bolases (sg.: bola; from Spanish and Portuguese bola, "ball", also known as a boleadora or boleadeira) is a type of throwing weapon made of weights on the ends of interconnected cords, used to capture animals by entangling their legs. Bolas were most famously used by the gauchos, but have been found in excavations of Pre-Columbian settlements, especially in Patagonia, where indigenous peoples (particularly the Tehuelche) used them to catch 200-pound guanacos and rheas. The Mapuche and the Inca army used them in battle. Mapuche warriors used bolas in their confrontations with the Chilean Army during the Occupation of Araucanía (1861–1883).
Use
Gauchos used boleadoras to capture running cattle or game. Depending on the exact design, the thrower grasps the boleadora by one of the weights or by the nexus of the cords. The thrower gives the balls momentum by swinging them and then releases the boleadora. The weapon is usually used to entangle the animal's legs, but when thrown with enough force can even inflict injury (e.g., by breaking a bone).
Traditionally, Inuit have used bolas to hunt birds, fouling the birds in air with the lines of the bola. People of a Feather showed Belcher Island Inuit using bolas to hunt eider ducks on the wing.
Design
There is no uniform design; most bolas have two or three balls, but there are versions of up to eight or nine. Some, but not all, bolas have balls of equal weight; some vary the knot and cord. Gauchos use bolas made of braided leather cords with wooden balls or small leather sacks full of stones at the ends of the cords.
Bolas can be named depending on the number of weights used:
Perdida (one weight)
Avestrucera or ñanducera (two weights, for rheas)
Somai (two weights)
Achico (three weights)
Boleadora (three weights)
Kiipooyaq (Inuit name for bolas with three or more weights)
Bolas of three weights are usually designed with two shorter cords with heavier weights, and one longer cord with a light weight. The heavier weights fly at the front parallel to each other, hit either side of the legs, and the lighter weight goes around, wrapping up the legs.
Other unrelated versions include qilumitautit, the bolas of the Inuit, made of sinew and bone weights and used to capture water birds.

A bole hill (also spelt bail hill) was a place where lead was formerly smelted in the open air. The bole was usually situated at or near the top of a hill where the wind was strong.
Totley Bole Hill on the western fringes of Sheffield consisted of a long low wall with two shorter walls at right angles to it at each end. At the base of a bole 20 feet (6.1 m) long were laid great trees called blocks. On these were laid blackwork, partly smelted ore about half a yard thick. Then came ten or twelve trees called shankards. On top of these three or four courses of fire trees were laid with fresh ore. This was ignited and burnt for about 48 hours. This smelted lead, which ran down channels provided for the purpose and was cast into sows of about 11 hundredweight. A single firing produced 16 fothers of lead (about 18 tons) from 160 loads of ore (about 40 tons) and 30 tons of wood. Much of the ore was left incompletely smelted having become blackwork. Some of this was smelted in a foot-pump blown furnace, but some was left to be used when the bole was next fired. Bole smelting was replaced by smelting in smeltmills in the late 16th century. That was in turn replaced by smelting in cupolas, a variety of reverberatory furnace in the 18th century.

The Bolzano process is a means to reduce magnesium to metallic form. "Dolomite-ferrosilicon briquettes are stacked on a special charge support system through which internal electric heating is conducted to the charge. A complete reaction takes 20 to 24 hours at 1,200 °C."
In 2014, Brazilian operations produced 10-15 kilotons of Mg by this process.
Also in 2014, Nevada Clean Magnesium announced its Tami-Mosi plan to create a ASTM B-92 pilot plant. The mineral resource is estimated at 412 billion tons of 12.3% grade Mg. The company produced its first ingot from a pilot plant in December 2018.

Bone char (Latin: carbo animalis) is a porous, black, granular material produced by charring animal bones. Its composition varies depending on how it is made; however, it consists mainly of tricalcium phosphate (or hydroxyapatite) 57–80%, calcium carbonate 6–10% and carbon 7–10%. It is primarily used for filtration and decolorisation.
Production
Bone char is primarily made from cattle and pig bones; however, to prevent the spread of variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, the skull and spine are no longer used. The bones are heated in a sealed vessel at up to 700 °C (1,292 °F); the oxygen concentration must be kept low while doing this, as it affects the quality of the product, particularly its adsorption capacity. Most of the organic material in the bones is driven off by heat, and was historically collected as Dippel's oil; that which is not driven off remains as activated carbon in the final product. Heating bones in an oxygen-rich atmosphere gives bone ash, which is chemically quite different.
Used bone char can be regenerated by washing with hot water to remove impurities, followed by heating to 500 °C (932 °F) in a kiln with a controlled amount of air.
Uses
Water treatment
The tricalcium phosphate in bone char can be used to remove fluoride and metal ions from water, making it useful for the treatment of drinking supplies.
Bone charcoal is the oldest known water defluoridation agent and was widely used in the United States from the 1940s through to the 1960s. As it can be generated cheaply and locally it is still used in certain developing countries, such as Tanzania.
Bone chars usually have lower surface areas than activated carbons, but present high adsorptive capacities for certain metals, particularly those from group 12 (copper, zinc, and cadmium). Other highly toxic metal ions, such as those of arsenic and lead may also be removed.
The practical example of the use of bone char in water purification is demonstrated by use of nanofiltration in Tanzania.
Sugar refining
Historically, bone char was often used in sugar refining as a decolorizing and deashing agent, particularly in cane sugar as this contains more colored impurities.
Bone char possesses a low decoloration capacity and must be used in large quantities, however, it is also able to remove various inorganic impurities, most importantly sulfates and the ions of magnesium and calcium. The removal of these is beneficial, as it reduces the level of scaling later in the refining process, when the sugar solution is concentrated. Modern alternatives to bone char include activated carbon and ion-exchange resins. However, a small number of companies remain completely or partially dependent on bone char for sugar refinement.
Black pigment
Bone char is also used as a black pigment for artist's paint, printmaking, calligraphic and drawing inks as well as other artistic applications because of its deepness of color and excellent tinting strength. Bone black and ivory black are artists' pigments which have been in use since historic times—by both old masters like Rembrandt and Velázquez and more modern painters such as Manet and Picasso. The black dresses and high hats of the gentlemen in Manet's Music in the Tuileries are painted in ivory black.
Ivory black was formerly made by grinding charred ivory in oil. Nowadays ivory black is considered a synonym for bone black. Actual ivory is no longer used because of the expense and because animals that are natural sources of ivory are subject to international control as endangered species.
Niche uses
It is used to refine crude oil in the production of petroleum jelly.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, bone char mixed with tallow or wax (or both) was used by soldiers in the field to impregnate military leather equipment, both to increase its lifespan and as the simplest way to obtain pigment for black leatherware. Military and civilians used it as shoe polish and preservative, including on shoes with the "rough" side out. In period reference materials, it is referred to as "black ball".
The ESA-NASA Solar Orbiter satellite uses a refined form of bone char applied to its titanium heatshield. This protects it against the glare and heat of the sun. Irish company Embio developed the coating and uses its 'CoBlast' technique, originally developed to coat titanium medical implants.
In popular culture
The production of bone char was featured on the Discovery Channel's TV series Dirty Jobs, on episode 19 of season 5, "Bone Black", originally broadcast on 9 February 2010.
Human bone char, referred to as "bone charcoal", is mentioned in Thomas Pynchon's novel The Crying of Lot 49. The bones come from US soldiers who died in combat during WWII and were buried in a lake in Italy, and the char is used for filters in cigarettes.
Human bone char is mentioned in Jaroslav Hašek's novel The Good Soldier Švejk. The work contains a reference to soldiers not dying in vain because their bones will be used to make bone charcoal ("spodium") for sugar refineries, the protagonist getting disciplined by his commander for wondering whether the coal from officers' bones is sold to the refineries at a higher price than that made from ordinary privates' bones.

Bookmatching is the practice of matching two (or more) wood or stone surfaces, so that two adjoining surfaces mirror each other, giving the impression of an opened book.
Overview
As applied to wood, bookmatching is usually done with veneer (produced in one of several ways), but can also be done with solid wood. The technique is used to beautify a variety of objects such as furniture, violins, guitars or the interior of high-luxury cars. The two adjoining surfaces are produced from the same piece of wood, so that they have (almost) exactly the same appearance, but mirrored. The final effect varies with the figure of the wood chosen and can range from extremely subtle (so that the two surfaces almost appear to be a single piece of wood), to dramatic effects with wavy grain showcased, as in high-end guitars.
Bookmatching is also possible with marble or other patterned stone.

The Bottom-blown Oxygen Converter or BBOC is a smelting furnace developed by the staff at Britannia Refined Metals Limited (“BRM”), a British subsidiary of MIM Holdings Limited (which is now part of the Glencore group of companies). The furnace is currently marketed by Glencore Technology. It is a sealed, flat-bottomed furnace mounted on a tilting frame that is used in the recovery of precious metals. A key feature is the use of a shrouded lance to inject oxygen through the bottom of the furnace, directly into the precious metals contained in the furnace, to oxidize base metals or other impurities as part of their removal as slag.
Introduction
Ores mined for their base metal content often contain precious metals, usually gold and silver. These have to be removed from the base metals as part of the refining processes used to purify the metals. In the case of copper electrolytic refining, the gold and silver fall to the bottom of the electrolytic refining cell as “slimes” that are subsequently treated to recover gold and silver as byproducts. In the case of lead refining, silver, gold, and other precious metals are typically removed using the Parkes process, in which zinc is added to the impure lead bullion to collect the silver, gold and other precious metals.
The BRM lead refinery at Northfleet in England uses the Parkes process followed by liquation and a vacuum induction retort to recover precious metals. The product of this process is a feed for the BBOC consisting of a mixture of lead, silver (60–75%), zinc (2–3%) and copper (2–3%), with trace amounts of gold. Prior to the development of the BBOC, BRM used cupellation in a 15 tonne (“t”) reverberatory cupellation furnace to recover the precious metals from this mixture. Three of these furnaces were used to produce 450 t of silver per year.
Cupellation works by exposing the mixture at high temperature to air or oxygen. The base metals, being less noble than silver and gold, react with the oxygen to form their oxides, which separate from the noble metals to form a slag that floats on the top of the residual metals (or “doré”). At BRM, the doré contains 99.7% silver.
To maximize the oxygen transfer from the blast air in the reverberatory furnace, a shallow bath is used, thus increasing the surface-area-to-volume ratio of the furnace.
A problem with using reverberatory furnaces for cupellation is that the zinc oxidizes first, forming a crust across the top of the molten material. This crust prevents the penetration of oxygen to the rest of the material, and so it has to be manually broken up and removed using a rabble bar. This is both labor-intensive and also results in the loss of some of the silver. Similarly, the oxidized lead slag has to be removed when it forms to maintain the operation, and its removal also results in loss of silver.
The BBOC was developed by BRM personnel as a way of reducing these and other problems, such as low energy efficiency and low oxygen utilization, associated with the reverberatory cupellation process.
Description
The BBOC furnace is a cylindrical steel vessel with a protective internal lining of refractory bricks. It is mounted on a tilting frame that allows it to be held at different angles at different stages of its operating cycle (see Figure 2). A hood is fixed over the top of the furnace, providing a seal that prevents lead and other fumes from escaping during the furnace’s operation (see Figure 1).
The key feature of the BBOC is the shrouded lance that passes through the refractory bricks at the bottom of the furnace. This lance allows oxygen to be injected directly into the molten metal contained in the furnace, away from the refractory lining. Doing so allows the region of high reaction rates to be removed from the vicinity of the lining, thus reducing its wear.
By injecting the oxygen directly into the bath, rather than blowing it on top (as in the case of the reverberatory cupellation furnace or top-blown rotary converters), the oxygen transfer efficiency is not impeded by the presence of the slag layer. It results in an oxygen utilization efficiency approaching 100%.
The lack of interference in the oxygen transfer by the slag layer has a couple of key benefits. The first is that the increased certainty in the estimation of oxygen utilization efficiency means that it is easier to calculate the endpoint of the process, making process control much easier. The second is that a thicker slag layer can be tolerated (because the oxygen does not have to pass through it), and this means that the losses of silver to the slag are reduced (because it is the silver at the interface between the metal and slag that becomes entrained during the removal of the slag and the thicker the slag layer, the smaller the silver content of the removed slag). BRM reported a decrease in the silver content of the BBOC slag compared to the reverberatory furnace slag of 50%.
BRM found that the reaction rate of the BBOC was 10–20 times that of its reverberatory cupellation furnace.
Refractory wear in the BBOC is largely confined to the slag line, at the top of the metal, where attack by litharge (lead oxide) is greatest. This is combated by using fused-grain, direct-bonded magnesite-chrome bricks to line the inside of the furnace shell.
Operation
Figure 2 shows the positions of the BBOC at various stages of the operating cycle.
The BBOC is held in an upright position during the charging stage. A solid or liquid charge is added using an overhead crane. The furnace is then tilted forward so that the lance is above the charge, and the charge is melted using an oil or natural gas burner that is inserted near the top of the furnace. Once the charge has been melted, the furnace is tilted back into the blowing position and oxygen is blown into the bath. Slag formed from the oxidation of lead and zinc is removed periodically by tilting the furnace forward again and pouring it off.
The oxygen flow rate during blowing for a three tonne capacity furnace is 20–30 Nm3/h. Zinc is initially oxidized to form a zinc oxide dross on the surface of the charge, but as lead oxide subsequently forms, a fluid slag of zinc and lead oxides is created. Most of the copper is removed at the same time as the lead. The final removal of copper to a level of 0.04% is undertaken at the end of the process by further additions of lead to collect the copper.
If the lance needs to be replaced at any time during operation, this is done by tilting the furnace forward until the lance is above the surface of the bath, where it can be removed and replaced without the contents of the furnace draining through the hole in the furnace lining.
The cupellation process finishes when the silver is about 99.7% pure. At this point, the silver is poured from the furnace and transferred to another furnace, where a flux is added to upgrade and remove the oxygen from the silver to produce market bullion of 99.9% purity.
History
Early development at BRM
Staff at BRM began work on an alternative to the conventional reverberatory cupellation furnace in the early 1980s. This included a review of the available technology, including the top-blown rotary converter ("TBRC"), on which test work was undertaken.
One of the first areas investigated was the use of oxygen-enriched blast air in the reverberatory furnace. This was “found to be of marginal benefit and not economically viable."
The BRM staff subsequently tried to increase the oxygen transfer rate by using lances submerged in the bath of the reverberatory furnace and found that there was some benefit in doing this. However, the wear rate of the lances was excessive and it was realized that the basic design of the furnace, with its shallow bath, was not conducive to the development of a high-intensity reactor.
The concept then evolved into a new furnace design, one that had a deep bath, in contrast to the reverberatory furnace design.
Initial tests of the bottom injection of oxygen were carried out on a small scale at Imperial College, London, using a nitrogen-shrouded tuyere. These showed that under certain conditions a protective accretion would form at the tip of the injector, and that oxygen utilization was high, with the oxidation reactions generating sufficient heat to keep the furnace hot until the final stages of refining when the impurity levels were low.
Additionally, the test work on the TBRC had shown that it had a high rate of refractory wear, due to the washing action of the slag caused by the rotation of the furnace, which provided additional pressure to develop an alternate process. The TBRC test work also resulted in low oxygen utilization (about 60%).
Based on the success of the small-scale tests, and with calculations indicating that the new design would have significant energy savings over the reverberatory furnace, the BRM staff built a 1.5 t pilot plant with a working volume of 150 liters (“L”). The oxygen injector was a fixed tuyere, located at corner of the base with the side wall, with an annular nitrogen shroud.
The initial pilot plant tests showed that it was difficult to maintain the protective accretion that had been generated in the small-scale tests, due to the variation in temperature and bullion composition that occurred throughout the cupelling cycle. Without the accretion, the nitrogen shroud could not provide sufficient protection to the injector, and it burned back to the level of the refractory lining, which resulted in damage to the lining.
The solution eventually developed was the concept of the moveable lance system in place of the fixed tuyere that had been used initially. The lance was pushed further into the furnace as its tip was worn away.
The initial lance advancing system was manual, but the current automated system was subsequently developed.
Once a sustainable system had been developed in the pilot plant, and after three years of pilot plant development, a commercial, 3 t-scale BBOC was commissioned at BRM in 1986. Its use reduced the fuel consumption per tonne of silver by 85%, from 30 gigajoules per tonne (“GJ/t”) to 4.5 GJ/t and the exhaust gas volume from 32 000 Nm3/h to 7500 Nm3/h.
Commercialization
After the successful operation of the BBOC at BRM, MIM Holdings Limited (“MIM”) decided to license the technology to other smelter and refinery operators. Early adopters included Hindustan Zinc Limited, which by 1995 had two 1 t BBOC plants operating in India, and ASARCO Inc., which was operating a 3 t BBOC furnace at its Omaha, Nebraska, refinery.
Rand Refinery
The South African company Rand Refinery Limited rebuilt its smelter in 1986, incorporating two 1.5 t TBRCs and a small static reverberatory furnace for cupellation to produce doré bullion containing gold and silver. The original concept was to produce doré bullion directly from the TBRCs, but this proved impossible, as it was found impossible to take the oxidation stage to completion while maintaining temperatures at which the doré would remain molten. Consequently, the reverberatory cupellation furnace was necessary to complete the process.
In January 1993, the management team of Rand Refinery decided to review alternate technologies to replace the TBRC–reverberatory furnace circuit, with the objective of having cupellation undertaken in a single stage. After evaluating the possibility of modifying the existing TBRCs by replacing the existing lance–burner combination with a separate lance and burner, and considering complete replacement of the TBRCs with an Ausmelt top-submerged lance furnace, Rand Refinery decided to replace one of the TBRC with a 4 t BBOC. The remaining TBRC is used to treat litharge slag to recover the lead for sale.
The Rand Refinery BBOC was commissioned in 1994. The operators reported a 28% reduction in the operating costs when the BBOC’s costs were compared with those of the TBRC–reverberatory furnace combination. This included a 45% reduction in bulk oxygen costs and halving the number of operators required to run the plant. The BBOC’s refractory life was 13 weeks, compared to an average refractory life of 2 weeks for the TBRCs. Other maintenance costs also fell.
Broken Hill Associated Smelters
The Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary Limited (“BHAS”) lead smelter, now owned by Nyrstar NV, has been the world’s largest lead smelter. Its staff was responsible for many significant technical developments in the lead smelting industry, including the updraft sinter plant and continuous lead refining.
Until 1990, BHAS recovered silver in a two-stage reverberatory cupellation process. This process suffered from low recoveries (80–83%), a long cycle time (4–5 days) that caused large in-process inventories, inefficient use of labor and energy, and poor workplace hygiene. After a test work program undertaken at Ausmelt’s facilities in Melbourne, BHAS switched to using a process based on the Sirosmelt top-submerged lance in June 1990.
The change to the lance-based furnace increased oxygen utilization to 95% and the cycle time was reduced to a little less than eight hours, “but the grade of the doré which could be economically produced was poor.” The doré from the new furnace still contained about 0.8% lead and 0.4% copper. It was also found impractical to cast anode plates of doré directly from the Sirosmelt furnace, so the Sirosmelt doré had to undergo a further refining step in a reverberatory furnace, together with a sodium nitrate flux.
Then, in 1996, BHAS decided to modernize the refining circuit and replaced the Sirosmelt silver refining furnace with a BBOC furnace. Commissioning of the modernized refining circuit was completed in 1999, and the lead throughput was increased by 11%, with the silver refining capacity increasing to over 400 t/y.
The BBOC process proved to be “generally successful”, although it did suffer some problems with the lance jamming that were attributed to higher than expected levels of zinc in the feed, due to problems removing the zinc in earlier stages of the refinery circuit. The higher levels of zinc also caused higher than expected refractory wear and excessive lance consumption, because the heat generated by oxidizing the zinc was greater than that of oxidizing lead.
The BBOC furnace proved to be capable of producing doré containing as little as 0.01% lead and less than 0.1% copper at a temperature around 1050 °C, but BHAS wanted to cast the doré directly into anode plates using an existing doré casting conveyor. Casting using the existing conveyor proved impossible at an operating temperature of 1050 °C, because the high thermal conductivity of the silver resulted in it freezing before it reached the molds. Consequently, BHAS decided to increase the operating temperature to 1100–1150 °C so that the silver remained liquid until cast into the anode molds. A side effect of this is that the lead and copper content of the product doré are higher than if the furnace is operated at 1050 °C, at 0.2% lead and 0.6% copper. Thermodynamic calculations have shown that this is unavoidable at this higher operating temperature.
Other lead smelters
Besides the smelters named so far, the BBOC has been licensed to the operators of the Trail smelter in British Columbia, the Belledune smelter in New Brunswick, the Noyelles Godault smelter in France, the Korea Zinc zinc smelter in Onsan, South Korea, and the lead smelter at Chanderiya in India.
Other applications
In addition to its use in recovering silver in lead refineries, the BBOC has been used to treat anode slimes from copper electrolytic refineries.
Anode slimes are composed of solid particles that do not dissolve in the electrolyte in the refining cells. This includes the gold and silver present in the copper anodes that are being refined. As with recovering silver in lead smelting, reverberatory furnaces are often used in the copper refining industry for the purification and recovery of gold and silver from anode slimes. However, the reverberatory furnaces suffer from similar disadvantages in copper anode doré production as they do in lead refineries, including resulting in a large inventory of gold in the system. Other furnace types used, include top-blown rotary converters and short rotary furnaces.
ASARCO Amarillo copper refinery
The ASARCO Amarillo copper refinery switched in 1991 from reverberatory furnace treatment of anode slimes to a BBOC to reduce the gold inventory. The original reverberatory furnace had a 15 t capacity. The production cycle of the reverberatory furnace was typically 7–10 days, with the final doré production being about 8 t per cycle.
A single 3 t capacity BBOC was installed, and it was found to increase rejection of selenium from the slimes, with a reduction in fluxing requirements of about 80%.
Sumitomo Metal Mining Niihama refinery
In the 1990s, the Niihama copper refinery, owned by Sumitomo Metal Mining Company Limited (“Sumitomo”), treated copper anode slimes generated in-house, together with anode slimes from Sumitomo’s Toyo refinery and lead refinery slime from the Harima Imperial Smelting Process smelter. A total of 1200 tonnes per year (“t/y”) of anode slimes and 400 t/y of lead refinery slimes were treated using a process flow sheet that included a chloridizing step to remove separate the lead as lead chloride (PbCl2) and a reverberatory-type doré furnace. It produced about 200 t of silver, 22 t of gold, 1.5 t of palladium, 300 kilograms (“kg”) of platinum and 40 kg of rhodium, as well as 60 t of selenium, 50 t of bismuth, 900 kg of tellurium and 150 t of antimony alloy annually.
The gold production doubled during the decade to 1996, as its concentration in anode slimes and the quantity of anode slimes increased. To enable this, Sumitomo decided in 1990 to upgrade the refinery, and as part of that upgrade, installed a 3.5 t-capacity BBOC to replace its reverberatory doré furnace in October 1992.
Sumitomo reported that, while the old oil-fired reverberatory furnace had served it well for many years, it had the following drawbacks:
its operation was labor-intensive
it had a low fuel efficiency
there was a high waste gas volume
the reaction rate was low.
Sumitomo investigated both the TBRC and BBOC furnaces before making a selection. It chose the BBOC over the TBRC technology because of the ease of control of the bath temperature, its high oxygen efficiency and its simple maintenance.
Sumitomo found that the impurity contents of BBOC doré anodes was high when the furnace was first commissioned. This was because it was important to determine the endpoint of the oxidation reactions to maximize the quality of the anodes. Sumitomo found that this could be determined by measuring the oxygen content of the off-gas using oxygen sensors based on stabilized zirconia with an Fe/FeO reference electrode.
Sumitomo subsequently adapted the BBOC to allow the chloridizing step to be undertaken in the furnace, thus eliminating the need for a separate chloridizing furnace for lead chloride production. This was done in February 1994 and was reported to be “giving very good results.”
Takehara copper refinery
The Takehara copper refinery of the Mitsui Mining & Smelting Company Limited of Japan commissioned a BBOC in its precious metals department in 1993.
Prior to the installation of the BBOC, the Takehara refinery refined a mixture of copper and lead anode slimes in a three reverberatory furnaces (two operating and one being rebricked) in a process that had a cycle time of 104 hours for refining 6 t of bullion.
The reverberatory furnaces were replaced with a single BBOC with a charge capacity of 6 t of feed. The cycle time was reduced to 50 hours. The use of the BBOC reduced the energy consumption from 74 GJ/t to 27 GJ/t and also had better bismuth elimination than the reverberatory furnaces.
Advantages
The following advantages have been reported for the BBOC:
very high oxygen efficiency – the injection of oxygen directly into the reaction zone within the furnace results in much greater oxygen efficiency (close to 100%) than with reverberatory furnaces (8% for the Niihama furnace) or top-blown rotary converters (about 30%)
reduced off-gas volume – the use of industrial oxygen and the high oxygen efficiency of the process means that excess air is not required to achieve the results. This reduces the off-gas volume and thus the cost of the off-gas train and handling equipment. Rand Refinery reported that the off-gas volume of the BBOC was about 75% of that of a TBRC with a special lance conversion and only 19% of that of top-submerged lance smelting. Niihama refinery reported that its BBOC had 15% of the off-gas volume of its reverberatory furnace while producing 1.8 times the product
higher reaction rates – by injecting the oxygen directly into the reaction zone, the reaction rates are much higher than in reverberatory furnaces where the oxygen has first to penetrate the slag layer. BRM reported a reaction rate per unit of furnace volume of 10–20 times that of the reverberatory furnace
lower refractory wear – Rand Refinery reported that the refractory linings of its TBRC furnaces needed replacing after approximately two weeks, while the linings of its BBOC furnace lasted about 14 weeks
lower precious metal inventories – a consequence of the higher reaction rates is that smaller furnace volumes are required and there are smaller cycle times. This results in lower precious metal inventories. In lead slimes bullion processing, the silver inventory was reduced from 4.5 t to 1.25 t after replacing a reverberatory furnace with a BBOC and at BRM the silver inventory fell from 11.5 t to 3.1 t with the introduction of the BBOC furnace
better energy efficiency – a supplementary burner is needed only during heating the charge and doré casting operations. During cupellation, the oxidation reactions provide sufficient heat to maintain temperature. There was a 92% reduction in fuel consumption per tonne of doré treated reported for the BBOC at the Niihama refinery
better product quality – BHAS reported that lead and copper levels in silver produced from the BBOC of 0.01% and 0.1% respectively were possible when the furnace was operating under design conditions, compared to 0.04% and 0.2% for the old reverberatory furnace, and 0.8% and 0.4% for the Sirosmelt furnace. Rand Refinery reported that a doré bullion of 99.2% was achievable. BRM reported that its doré is 99.7% silver
higher recoveries of precious metals – due to changes in the way the BBOC is operated compare to reverberatory furnaces, notably in being able to use deeper layers of slag, there is an increase in the recovery of precious metals compared to the reverberatory furnaces. Replacement of reverberatory furnaces with BBOC furnaces saw the direct silver recovery increase from 92.5% to 97.5% at BRM and from 70% to over 95% at Niihama
simple vessel design – the BBOC has a relatively simple vessel design, without the complex moving parts of TBRCs
good process control – the high oxygen utilization allows good process control, particularly when combined with an oxygen sensor in the off-gas system
lower labor requirements – the BBOC has a lower labor requirement than reverberatory furnaces, top-submerged lance furnaces and TBRCs
lower operating costs – lower labor requirements, lower fuel requirements and longer refractory life contributed to a 28.3% reduction in overall operating costs when the BBOC was installed at the Rand Refinery
lower capital cost – the BBOC is a simpler furnace than TBRC or top-submerged lance furnaces. Rand Refinery reported a capital cost comparison indicating that its BBOC option was 67% of the cost of a top-submerged lance option.

A bow drill is a simple hand-operated type of tool, consisting of a rod (the spindle or drill shaft) that is set in rapid rotary motion by means of a cord wrapped around it, kept taut by a bow which is pushed back and forth with one hand. This tool of prehistoric origin has been used both as a drill, to make holes on solid materials such as wood, stone, or bone, and as a fire drill to start a fire.
The spindle can be held into a fixed frame, or by a hand-held block (the hand piece or thimble) with a hole into which the top of the shaft is inserted. Some lubricant should be used to reduce friction between these two parts, otherwise, it could lead to some trouble when doing it too fast. In Pakistan it has been dated between the 5th–4th millenniums BCE.
History
This tool of prehistoric origin has been used both as a drill, to make holes on solid materials such as wood, stone, or bone (including teeth), and as a fire drill to start a fire.
Bow drills with green jasper bits were used in Mehrgarh (Pakistan) between the 5th and 4th millenniums BCE to drill holes into lapis lazuli and carnelian. Similar drills were found in other parts of the Indus Valley civilization and Iran one millennium later.
A popular campcraft book of 1920 attributed the invention to the Inuit.
Construction
The string of the bow is wrapped once around the spindle, so that it is tight enough not to slip during operation. In a variation called the Egyptian bow drill, the cord is wound around the shaft multiple times, or is fixed to it by a knot or a hole.
The strap drill is a simpler version, where the bow is absent and the cord is kept taut by pulling the ends with both hands, while moving them left and right at the same time. In the absence of a frame, the thimble is shaped so that it can be held with the chin or the mouth.
Uses
For use as a fire drill, the shaft should have a blunt end, which is placed into a small cavity of a stationary piece of wood (the fireboard). Turning the shaft with high speed and downward pressure generates heat, which eventually creates powdered charcoal and ignites it forming a small ember.
For drilling, the lower end of the spindle may be fitted with a hard drill bit that creates the hole by abrasion or cutting.
The bow lathe used for traditional woodturning uses the same principle as the bow drill.

Bowtell is derived from the medieval term bottle; in architecture it refers to a round or corniced molding below the abacus in a Tuscan or Roman Doric capital; the word is a variant of boltel, which is probably the diminutive of bolt, the shaft of an arrow or javelin. A roving bowtell is one which passes up the side of a bench end and round a finial, the term roving being applied to that which follows the line of a curve.

A branding iron is used for branding, pressing a heated metal shape against an object or livestock with the intention of leaving an identifying mark.
History
The history of branding is very much tied to the history of using animals as a commodity. The act of marking livestock with fire-heated marks to identify ownership begins in ancient times with the ancient Egyptians. The process continued throughout the ages, with both Romans and American colonists using the process to brand slaves as well.
In the English lexicon, the Germanic word "brand" originally meant anything hot or burning, such as a fire-brand, a burning stick. By the European Middle Ages it commonly identified the process of burning a mark into a stock animals with thick hides, such as cattle, so as to identify ownership under animus revertendi. In England, the rights of common including the common pasture system meant that cattle could be grazed on certain land with commoner's rights and the cattle were branded to show ownership, often with the commoner's or Lord of the manor's mark. The practice was widespread in most European nations with large cattle grazing regions, including Spain.
With colonialism, many cattle branding traditions and techniques were spread via the Spanish Empire to South America and to countries of the British Empire including the Americas, Australasia & South Africa where distinct sets of traditions and techniques developed respectively.
In the Americas these European systems continued with English tradition being used in the New England Colonies and spread outwards with the western expansion of the U.S. The Spanish system evolved from the south with the vaquero tradition in what today is the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. The branding iron consisted of an iron rod with a simple symbol or mark which was heated in a fire. After the branding iron turned red-hot, the cowhand pressed the branding iron against the hide of the cow. The unique brand meant that cattle owned by multiple owners could then graze freely together on the commons or open range. Drovers or cowboys could then separate the cattle at roundup time for driving to market.
Types of branding irons
Branding Irons come in a variety of styles, designed primarily by their method of heating.
Fire-heated
The traditional fire-heated method is still in use today. While they require longer lengths of time to heat, are inconsistent in temperature and all around inferior to more advanced forms of branding, they are inexpensive to produce and purchase. Fire-heated branding irons are used to brand wood, steak, leather, livestock and plastics.
Electric
Electric branding irons utilize an electric heating element to heat a branding iron to the desired temperature. Electric branding irons come in many variations from irons designed to brand cattle, irons designed to mark wood and leather and models designed to be placed inside a drill press for the purposes of manufacturing. An electric branding iron’s temperature can be controlled by increasing or decreasing the flow of electricity.
Propane
Propane Branding Irons use a continuous flow of propane to heat the iron head. They are commonly used where electricity is not available. Utilizing the flow of propane, the temperature can be adjusted for varying branding environments.
A commercially built branding iron heater fired with L.P. gas is a common method of heating several branding irons at once.
Freeze-branding
In stark contrast to traditional hot-iron branding, freeze branding uses an iron that has been chilled with a coolant such as dry ice or liquid nitrogen. Instead of burning a scar into the animal's skin, a freeze brand damages the pigment-producing hair cells, causing the animal's hair to grow back white within the branded area. This white-on-dark pattern is prized by cattle ranchers as its contrast allows some range work to be conducted with binoculars rather than individual visits to every animal. To apply a freeze brand the hair coat of the animal is first shaved very closely so that bare skin is exposed. Then the frozen iron is pressed to the animal's bare skin for a period of time that varies with both the species of animal and the color of its hair coat. Shorter times are used on dark-colored animals, as this causes follicle melanocyte death and hence permanent pigment loss to the hair when it regrows. Longer times, sometimes as little as five seconds more, are needed for animals with white hair coats. In these cases the brand is applied for long enough to kill the cells of the growth follicle, those that create the hair filaments themselves. This leaves the animal permanently bald in the branded area. The somewhat darker epidermis then contrasts well with a pale animal's coat.
Popular use
Livestock
Livestock branding is perhaps the most prevalent use of a branding iron. Modern use includes gas heating, the traditional fire-heated method, an iron heated by electricity (electric cattle branding iron) or an iron super cooled by dry ice (freeze branding iron). Cattle, horses and other livestock are commonly branded today for the same reason they were in Ancient times, to prove ownership.
Wood branding
Woodworkers will often use Electric or Fire-Heated Branding Irons to leave their maker's mark or company logo. Timber pallets and other timber export packaging is often marked in this way in accordance with ISPM 15 to indicate that the timber has been treated to prevent it carrying pests.
Steak
Steak branding irons are used commonly by barbecue enthusiasts and professional chefs to leave a mark indicating how well done a steak is or to identify the chef or grill master.
Leather
Branding Irons are used often by makers of horse tack often in place of a steel leather stamp to indicate craftsmanship.

Breedon Group plc (formerly Ennstone plc) is a British construction materials company which has its headquarters at Breedon on the Hill, Leicestershire, England. It is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 250 Index.
Breedon was traditionally centered around the quarrying of stone at Breedon on the Hill since the late 1800s. During 2000, Breedon was purchased by the Midlands-based aggregates firm Ennstone. In 2009, Ennstone entered administration and was acquired by the investment company Marwyn Materials, after which the firm was reorganised into Breedon Aggregates. Throughout the early 2010s, Breedon completed numerous acquisitions, both of whole companies and assets of larger competitors, such as Aggregate Industries and Marshalls plc. In 2016, the firm was cleared by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) to complete its purchase of Hope Construction Materials. Two years later, CMA also cleared a complex transaction between Breedon and rival firm Tarmac under which numerous plants, quarries, and cash were exchanged. During 2020, Breedon was again cleared to take over 49 ready-mix plants, 28 aggregate quarries, 14 asphalt plants and numerous other operations under a £178 million deal with Cemex.
In May 2023, Breedon was listed for the first time on the main market of the London Stock Exchange. It has maintained its acquisitive strategy, which has included an expansion of its presence in the North American market via the purchase of BMC Enterprises. The firm's current chairman is Amit Bhatia, son-in-law of Lakshmi Mittal, the billionaire steel magnate who became a Breedon shareholder following the acquisition of Hope Construction Materials.
History
Breedon has long been headquartered in the village and parish of Breedon on the Hill, where stone has been quarried since the late 1800s. During 2000, Breedon, along with its Breedon Hill and Cloud Hill quarries, was acquired by Ennstone, a Midlands-based aggregates group. The quarry at Breedon produces both limestone and gravel.
During March 2009, due to the 2008 financial crisis, Ennstone went into administration and started selling off its divisions. In 2010, Ennstone was acquired by building materials industry veterans Peter Tom, chairman of the Leicester Tigers rugby club, and Simon Vivian, through their investment company, Marwyn Materials. Their strategy for the combined business, which they named Breedon Aggregates, was to grow the company via the acquisition of small, often family-owned operations, in an industry generally regarded as having high barriers to entry.
Throughout the early 2010s, Breedon undertook numerous acquisitions. During July 2011, it purchased the collapsed firm C&G Concrete Ltd under a £10.15 million that rescued 130 jobs. In January 2012, the firm also bought another concrete company, Nottingham Readymix. During April 2013, Breedon acquired assets in Scotland valued at £34 million from Aggregate Industries as well as £19 million of assets from Marshalls plc. That same month, Peter Tom, the firm's chief executive, publicly stated his ambition to expand via more acquisitions and that the aggregates market had ‘bottomed-out’. Breedon's turnover and profit figures both climbed considerable during the first half of 2013.
In February 2016, the British Government's Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) announced it would investigate the proposed acquisition of Hope Construction Materials by Breedon, citing a possible lessening of competition in the building materials industry. The subsequent investigation held that the acquisition would not unduly reduce competition for the production and supply of aggregates, but that there should be further investigation into the supply of ready-mixed concrete. In response to the CMA, Breedon offered to sell 14 concrete plants from a list of 27 sites that the CMA believed would have reduced competition. The CMA accepted Breedon's list of divestments and permitted the acquisition. Plants divested included sites at Cloddach, Moray and Inverness. The £336m cash-and-shares acquisition of Hope closed in August 2016.
During November 2016, Breedon acquired the County Durham-based firm Sherburn Minerals Group for a total consideration of up to £15.7 million. In May 2017, it purchased Pro Mini Mix, a specialist concrete ‘mini mix’ supplier based in Oldbury. Three months later, Breedon acquired Humberside Aggregates, an independent sand & gravel quarry and aggregates merchanting business based at North Cave near Hull in East Yorkshire, for a total consideration of £9.0 million.
In December 2017, Breedon announced its planned acquisition from Tarmac of four quarries and an asphalt plant in exchange for £16.5 million, to be satisfied by the transfer to Tarmac of 27 of its readymix plants and payment of £4.9 million in cash. However, in April 2018, CMA announced that Tarmac had been requested to address "competition concerns" regarding the deal; two months later, clearance was granted.
During February 2018, Breedon was reportedly holding talks with the aim of acquiring a majority stake in the Lagan Group, a construction business that performed quarrying, cement, asphalt and contracting; in April 2018, it was confirmed that Lagan Group had been sold to Breedon for £455 million. During June 2018, the company acquired Blinkbonny Quarry in the Scottish Borders, adding nearly three million tonnes of hard rock to its reserves.
In October 2019, it was announced that the company had purchased Roadway Surfacing & Civil Engineering for up to £13.5 million, establishing it as a fully integrated business in North Wales.
In January 2020, Breedon agreed a £178 million deal with Cemex to take over 49 ready-mix plants, 28 aggregate quarries, four depots, one cement terminal, 14 asphalt plants and four concrete products operations. This deal was temporarily suspended due to CMA ordering that a regulatory investigation be conducted. Once cleared, the transaction was completed in September 2020.
During May 2023, due to the company increasing valuation, it was transferred from the Alternative Investment Market to the main market of the London Stock Exchange. In March 2024, Breedon acquired the US-based firm BMC Enterprises in exchange for £238.1 million.
Operations
Breedon Group produces cement, construction aggregates, asphalt, ready-mixed concrete, bitumen and other construction materials.
The group is reported to hold a total of approximately 900 million tonnes of natural mineral reserves and resources.
Breedon Group owns a 37.5% stake in BEAR Scotland, which maintains roads on behalf of Transport Scotland, and a majority stake in Alba Traffic Management, an Inverness-based firm that provides traffic management services for highway works, events and utilities. Through Mobile Concrete Solutions (MCS), Breedon also operates an on-site concrete batching service, run as a joint venture with construction services company TSL.
Products
Breedon produces a variety of grades of bulk and packed cement, in addition to crushed rock, sand, gravel, agricultural lime and a range of specialist ready-mixed concretes and asphalts. One of its best-known products is Golden Amber Gravel, used for pathways and driveways; it is reportedly the only gravel with a Royal Warrant. Golden Amber is used at Chatsworth House, The National War Memorial Arboretum and the Sandringham Estate.
Other products include speedway shale, which is a mix of crushed limestone and clay laid down to form the competitive surface at motorcycle speedway tracks. Breedon shale is used in international speedway tracks such as Cardiff, Gothenburg and Copenhagen. Breedon developed its shale product alongside former speedway World Champion Ole Olsen and his son Torben.

A bridle joint is a woodworking joint, similar to a mortise and tenon, in that a tenon is cut on the end of one member and a mortise is cut into the other to accept it. The distinguishing feature is that the tenon and the mortise are cut to the full width of the tenon member.
The corner bridle joint (also known as a slot mortise and tenon) joins two members at their respective ends, forming a corner. This form of the joint is commonly used to house a rail in uprights, such as legs. It provides good strength in compression and is fairly resistant to racking, although a mechanical fastener or pin is often required. The bridle joint is very popular in workbench construction.
Corner bridles are often used to join frame components when the frame is to be shaped. Material can be removed from the joined members after assembly without sacrificing joint integrity.
A variation of the bridle joint is the T-bridle, which joins the end of one member to the middle of another. The tee bridle joint is very strong and good for joining 2 pieces together.
In traditional timber framing the bridle joint is commonly used to join the tops of principal rafters.
Applications
Legs or stiles to rails
Frames
Methods
Corner bridles can be cut by the following methods:
Hand saw and chisel
Circular saw with multiple passes (depending on width and depth)
Table saw with a dado set in a single pass
Electric router using a straight or rabbet bit
Spindle mould
Brace and auger to start the mortise, followed by chiseling to square the opening
Mortising machine to create the mortise

Brinelling is the permanent indentation of a hard surface. It is named after the Brinell scale of hardness, in which a small ball is pushed against a hard surface at a preset level of force, and the depth and diameter of the mark indicates the Brinell hardness of the surface. Brinelling is permanent plastic deformation of a surface, and usually occurs while two surfaces in contact are stationary (such as rolling elements and the raceway of a bearing) and the material yield strength has been exceeded.
Brinelling is undesirable, as the parts often mate with other parts in very close proximity. The very small indentations can quickly lead to improper operation, such as chattering or excess vibration, which in turn can accelerate other forms of wear, such as spalling and ultimately, failure of the bearing.
Introduction
Brinelling is a material surface failure caused by Hertz contact stress that exceeds the material limit. It usually occurs in situations where a significant load force is distributed over a relatively small surface area. Brinelling typically results from a heavy or repeated impact load, either while stopped or during rotation, though it can also be caused by just one application of a force greater than the material limit.
Brinelling can be caused by a heavy load resting on a stationary bearing for an extended length of time. The result is a permanent dent or "brinell mark". The brinell marks will often appear in evenly spaced patterns along the bearing races, resembling the primary elements of the bearing, such as rows of indented lines for needle or roller bearings or rounded indentations in ball bearings. It is a common cause of roller bearing failures, and loss of preload in bolted joints when a hardened washer is not used. For example, brinelling occurs in casters when the ball bearings within the swivel head produce grooves in the hard cap, thus degrading performance by increasing the required swivel force.
Avoiding brinelling damage
Engineers can use the Brinell hardness of materials in their calculations to avoid this mode of failure. A rolling element bearing's static load rating is defined to avoid this failure type. Increasing the number of elements can provide better distribution of the load, so bearings intended for a large load may have many balls, or use needles instead. This decreases the chances of brinelling, but increases friction and other factors. However, although roller and ball bearings work well for radial and thrust loading, they are often prone to brinelling when very high impact loading, lateral loading, or vibration are experienced. Babbitt bearings or bronze bushings are often used instead of roller bearings in applications where such loads exist, such as in automotive crankshafts or pulley sheaves, to decrease the possibility of brinelling by distributing the force over a very large surface area.
A common cause of brinelling is the use of improper installation procedures. Brinelling often occurs when pressing bearings into holes or onto shafts. Care must usually be taken to ensure that pressure is applied to the proper bearing race to avoid transferring the pressure from one race to the other through the balls or rollers. If pressing force is applied to the wrong race, brinelling can occur to either or both of the races. The act of pressing or clamping can also leave brinell marks, especially if the vise or press has serrated jaws or roughened surfaces. Flat pressing plates are often used in the pressing of bearings, while soft copper, brass, or aluminum jaw covers are often used in vises to help avoid brinell marks from being forced into the workpiece.
False brinelling
A similar-looking kind of damage is called false brinelling and is caused by fretting wear. Fretting wear occurs when localized wear-marks develop in evenly spaced patterns, with raised or unworn portions in between, like frets on a guitar. False brinelling occurs in two types: stationary and by precession.
Stationary false-brinelling occurs without any rotational motion in the bearing. This occurs when contacting bodies vibrate against each other in the presence of very small loads, which pushes lubricant out of the contact surface area, all while the bearing assembly cannot move far enough (or rotate far enough) to redistribute the displaced lubricant. The result is a finely polished surface that resembles a brinell mark, but has not permanently deformed either contacting surface. This type of false brinelling usually occurs in bearings during transportation, between the time of manufacture and installation. The polished surfaces are often mistaken for brinelling, although no actual damage to the bearing exists. The false brinelling will disappear after a short break-in period of operation.
Fretting wear can also occur during operation, causing deep indentations. This occurs when small vibrations form in the rotating shaft and become harmonically in sync with the speed of rotation, causing circular oscillations in the shaft. The oscillation causes the shaft to move in precession, and the timing of the rotation speed causes the balls or rollers to contact the races only when they are in similar positions. This forms wear marks caused by contact with the bearings and the races in specific areas, but not in others, leaving an uneven wear-pattern that can become quite deep before failure occurs, resembling brinelling. However, the marks are usually too wide, due to the motion of the bearing, and do not exactly match the shape of the rolling elements, and therefore this type of wear can be differentiated from true brinelling.

The Britannia Creek wood distillation plant was the only commercial undertaking of its type in Australia. It formed part of the Cuming, Smith and Company and operated about 80 km east of Melbourne in the foothills of the Yarra Ranges between 1907 and 1924.
Background
The plant grew out of turbulent times in the late 1880s when the State of Victoria and its capital Melbourne was experiencing an unprecedented land boom. Pastoral development, particularly in western Victoria created a big demand for fertilizers and various other chemicals which at the time were all imported.
Later during the 1890s, Australia suffered a major economic depression which multiplied the costs of imported chemicals and bulky fertilizers. Rationalising of Victoria's fledgling fertilizer industry followed with many company closures and some amalgamations.
Cuming, Smith and Co survived and seized the opportunity to investigate producing chemicals using wood waste left behind after forest harvesting.
Building on experimental plants in England and Germany the company built a large wood distillation plant at Britannia Creek near Wesburn.
The site was chosen at Britannia Creek after consultation with the State Forest Department, later the Forests Commission Victoria.
The distillation plant
The new wood distillery took more than a year to build at a cost of £50000. The plant commenced operations in August 1907 following a grand opening dinner held at the local Mechanics Hall.
The company also built and operated a network of sawmills and timber tramlines to bring timber from the forest. The company mostly used horses to haul logs and timber tramlines but also owned a small steam engine known as Westward Ho.
No part of a harvested tree was wasted. Sawmills cut the main part of the log and split wood intended for distillation was stockpiled and dried for up to 18 months.
On average, 60 to 100 men were employed to distill approximately 20000 tons of wood from the adjoining state forest.
Dry billets were then loaded into a cylindrical shaped cage which held about three tons and taken to the drying chambers before the distilling retorts. The retorts were about 40 feet long and 7 feet in diameter and held four caged trucks of wood.
Controlled combustion in the oxygen-free retorts took about 30 hours. About 40 different chemicals, some liquid and some gases, were formed during the process leaving charcoal which was also in great demand for industrial gas engines and domestic uses.
One of the principal chemicals produced was acetone which was in great demand during the War of 1914-18 for the manufacture of cordite used in ammunition.
Acetone was also used for the manufacture of celluloid wearing apparel such as collars, cuffs and buttons. Acetone was also used to manufacture chloroform for anesthetic uses.
Other products included common methylated spirits and denatured alcohol.
The Warburton railway line had opened to the Yarra Valley in 1901 enabled chemical products to be shipped to markets.
The later advent of electricity from Victoria's vast brown coalfields in the Latrobe Valley after the war drastically reduced the demand for charcoal.
It wasn't until the second world war and the shortage of petrol that Victoria once again looked to charcoal as a fuel and the Forest Commission built Kurth Kiln at nearby Gembrook.
Plant closure
The end of the War in 1918 opened up global trade again cheaper imports together with the decline for charcoal led to the final closure of the Britannia Creek distillation plant in 1924.
Major bushfires in 1926 razed the factory leaving little machinery or evidence of the mill's existence.
The distillation plant site was sold after the 1926 fires to Samuel Bedggood who built a new sawmill.
Girl Guide Camp
After the 1926 bushfires, three company residences remained plus the original manager's house. After changing hands a few times the land and building were sold to the Victorian Girl Guides Association in 1938 and became known as Britannia Park. The Cuming residence became Guide House and the former residence used by the chief engineer became Brownie House.
Gallery

The British Woodworking Federation is the trade association for the woodworking and joinery manufacturing industry in the UK. It has just around 600 members drawn from manufacturers, distributors and installers of timber doors (including fire doors), windows, conservatories, staircases, all forms of architectural joinery including interior fit out, as well as suppliers to the industry.
The federation was founded in 1976 through the merger of the British Woodwork Manufacturers Association and the Joinery and Timber Construction Association.

In lithic analysis, a subdivision of archaeology, a bulb of applied force (also known as a bulb of percussion or simply bulb of force) is a defining characteristic of a lithic flake. Bulb of applied force was first correctly described by Sir John Evans, the cofounder of prehistoric archeology. However, bulb of percussion was coined scientifically by W.J. Sollas. When a flake is detached from its parent core, a portion of the Hertzian cone of force caused by the detachment blow is detached with it, leaving a distinctive bulb on the flake and a corresponding flake scar on the core. In the case of a unidirectional core, the bulb of applied force is produced by an initiated crack formed at the point of contact, which begins making the Hertzian cone. The outward pressure increases causing the crack to curve away from the core and the bulb formation. The bulb of applied force forms below the striking platform as a slight bulge. If the flake is completely crushed, the bulb will not be visible. Bulbs of applied force may be distinctive, moderate, or diffuse, depending upon the force of the blow used to detach the flake, and upon the type of material used as a fabricator. The bulb of applied force can indicate the mass or density of the tool used in the application of the force. The bulb may also be an indication of the angle of the force. This information is helpful to archaeologists in understanding and recreating the process of flintknapping. Generally, the harder the material used as a fabricator, the more distinctive the bulb of applied force. Soft hammer percussion has a low diffuse bulb while hard hammer percussion usually leaves a more distinct and noticeable bulb of applied force. Pressure flake also allowed for diffuse bulbs. The bulb of percussion of a flake or blade is convex and the core has a corresponding concave bulb. The concave bulb on the core is known as the negative bulb of percussion. Bulbs of applied force are not usually present if the flake has been struck off naturally. This allows archaeologists to identify and distinguish natural breakage from human artistry. The three main bulb types are flat or nondescript, normal, and pronounced. A flat or nondescript bulb is poorly defined and does not rise up on the ventral surface. A normal bulb on the ventral side has average height and well-defined. A pronounced bulb rises up on ventral side and is very large.
When explained visually, the bulb of percussion is visible on the ventral face as opposed to the dorsal face (where it is smoother) and considered to be on the "inside" of the parent core. The bulb of percussion is the primary feature that identifies the ventral surface of a flake or blade artifact. Locating its position reveals which is the proximal end of an artifact. Along the proximal end, there may be the formation of ripple marks. These ripple marks allow for the direction traveled by the applied force through the lithic when it was detached. The striking of the flake is usually produced by knapping (or flintknapping), a process which requires the user to chip away material from high-silica stones like "flint" in a carefully controlled manner with special devices to create sharp projectile points or tools. A common characteristic that is associated with the bulb of applied force is a bulbar scar. This scar is from a small chip or flake on the bulb. This is known as an eraillure flake scar. It is produced during the initial impact of flake removal. Occasionally, there is more than one contact point on a striking platform which creates a series of superimposed waves. The eraillure flake is a chip removed through contact of a dominant force wave that creates the conchoidal flake and inferior waves. Bulb of applied force is not produced by bipolar technology or wedging initiation.

Bundwerk is a method of building with timber that was used especially in the 19th century in Austria, South Tyrol and Bavaria. After log construction and timber framing, bundwerk is one of the most widespread forms of timber building techniques. It involved using wooden beams that were arranged partly in a lattice or diagonally over a cross. It often decorated the front and gable sides of agricultural buildings, frequently the grain barn or Stadel of quadrangular farms (Vierseithöfen).
In northeastern Upper Bavaria bundwerk is especially varied and colourful. By contrast, in the Werdenfelser Land and the region around Innsbruck only a few places exhibit this type of timber building throughout.
Bundwerk had its heyday between 1830 and 1860 when artists and woodcarvers, as well as carpenters, decorated the bundwerk with paintings and carvings, often with mythical creatures or Christian symbols.
Literature
Jüngling, Armin: Das Bundwerk am Bauernhaus des Chiemgaus. 1978
Stoermer, Hans W.: Zimmererkunst am Bauernhaus: Bayrisch-Alpines Bundwerk. 1981
Werner, Paul:
Das Bundwerk: eine alte Zimmermannstechnik: Konstruktion, Gestaltung, Ornamentik. 1985; 1988
Bundwerk in Bayern. 1988
Das Bundwerk in Bayern. 2000 - ISBN 3-927957-22-4
Fratzen und Schlangen am Stadel Bundwerk; das schönste Zeugnis bäuerlicher Baukultur. In: Unser Bayern. 2000
Enno Burmeister: Bundwerkstadel im Rupertiwinkel. 1989
Günther Knesch:
Der Bundwerkstadel Architektur und Volkskunst im östlichen Oberbayern. 1989
Wie alt ist das niederbayerische Bundwerk. In: Bayerisches Jahrbuch für Volkskunde. 1989
Der Bundwerkstadel von Nodern aus der Zeit um 1600. In: Ars Bavarica. 1989
Zansham, ein reichgestalteter Bundwerkstadel des 19. Jahrhunderts. In: Forschungen zur historischen Volkskultur. 1989
Der „Stiefel“ am niederbayerischen Bundwerk. In: Ars Bavarica. 1991
Bundwerkstadel aus Ostoberbayern 28 Bauaufnahmen. 1991
Holzbau in Niederbayern: Ständerbau, Bundwerk, Blockbau am Stadel. In: Niederbayern. 1995
Der Bundwerkstadel von Feldkirchen bei Trostberg Bauwerk und Bedeutung. In: Ars Bavarica. 1996
Bundwerkstadel in Niederbayern eine Dokumentation. 1997
Bundwerkstadel bäuerliche Baukunst in Niederbayern. In: Ostbairische Grenzmarken. 1998
Der Bundwerkstadel beim „Wagenhofer“. In: Das Salzfass. 1998
Löwen am Bundwerk. In: Schönere Heimat. 2001
Ein Bundwerkstadelbilderbogen. In: Das Salzfass. 2001
Die Bundwerkbau in einigen Landschaften des Alpenvorlandes und des Alpenlandes. In: Historischer Holzbau in Europa. 1999

The Bunker Hill Mine and Smelting Complex (colloquially the Bunker Hill smelter) was a large smelter located in Kellogg, Idaho, in the Coeur d'Alene Basin. When built, it was the largest smelting facility in the world. It is located in what became known as the Silver Valley of the Coeur d'Alene Basin, an area for a century that was a center of extensive silver and other metal mining and processing. This resulted in extensive contamination of water, land and air, endangering residents including the Coeur d'Alene Tribe, which had traditionally depended on fish from the waterways as part of its subsistence.
In 1983 the United States Environmental Protection Agency added this area to the National Priorities List as a Superfund site for investigation and cleanup. In 1991 the Coeur d'Alene Tribe filed suit against the mining companies for damages and cleanup costs; they were joined by the federal government in 1996 and the state of Idaho in 2011. Settlement was reached with the two major defendants in 2008 and 2011, with an agreement for funding of $263.4 million plus interest for cleanup and restoration of habitat.
History
Phillip O'Rourke filed the Bunker Hill mining claim on 10 September 1885, located along the west side of Milo Creek. Named after the Revolutionary War battle, the claim listed the date of discovery as 4 September, with Noah S. Kellogg as a witness. Similar claims were made by Noah Kellogg himself, Jacob Goetz and Cornelius Sullivan, which included the Sullivan claim on the east side of Milo Creek. Other claims followed, including the Last Chance by Charles Sweeny, the Stemwinder by George B. McAuley, and the Sierra Nevada by Van B. LeLashmutt. In all the stories recounting the original find, a jackass plays a key role in discovering the galena ore vein. A ruling by Justice Norman Buck awarded O.O. Peck and Dr. J.T. Cooper of Murray, Idaho, a quarter interest in the Bunker Hill claim, since those two provided the ore-discovering jackass as a grubstake to Noah Kellogg. Noah Kellogg subsequently leased the claim to Jim Wardner, who went on to found the town of Wardner, Idaho on 4 April 1886.
Milled ore was initially shipped by wagon to Kingston, Idaho, then by the steamship The Coeur d' Alene to Coeur d' Alene, Idaho, then by wagon to Rathdrum, Idaho, and finally loaded onto the Northern Pacific Railroad. Later, Daniel Chase Corbin built the Spokane Falls and Idaho Railway to connect Coeur d' Alene to the Northern Pacific Railway on the east side of Spokane, Washington, and the Coeur d' Alene Railway and Navigation Company railway to link Cataldo, Idaho with Burke, Idaho. Then in 1886, Corbin bought the Coeur d' Alene and a second steamship, the General Sherman, and built a new mill, which milled 100 tons of ore a day into refined ore containing 28 ounces of silver per ton. The ore was smelted in Wickes, Montana. In 1887, Corbin added a third steamship, the Kootenai. The steamships were replaced by a Northern Pacific and Union Pacific railway in 1891.
Simeon Reed bought the Bunker Hill Mine and Mill, and incorporated the Bunker Hill and Sullivan Mining and Concentrating Company on 29 July 1887. John Hays Hammond was hired to manage the mine, and a new concentrator, The Old South Mill, became operational in 1891, capable of 150 tons per day. A 10,000 foot long aerial tramway was installed to connect the adit in Wardner with the mill in Kellogg.
Frederick Worthen Bradley took over management of the mine in 1893, and became president of Bunker Hill Co.in 1897. He installed the first electric hoist in 1894, and replaced the haulage horses with a locomotive. In 1897, work started on a tunnel connecting the mine with Kellogg. Then, in 1898, he gained control of the ASARCO lead smelter in Tacoma, Washington, when Bunker Hill Co. and Alaska Treadwell purchased a controlling interest.
For years Bunker Hill, like other mines in the region, was the site of intense struggles between regional miners' unions and mine owners/managers. The owners of the Bunker Hill mine organized with other mine owners to form the Mine Owners Protective Association in order to fight the unions. The Bunker Hill owners repeatedly refused to meet or negotiate with union representatives, leading to regular community protests. On April 29, 1899, during a union demonstration, a group of workers hijacked a Northern Pacific train in Burke, Idaho and took it to Wardner. After a firefight with the Bunker Hill security guards, they dynamited the Bunker Hill and Sullivan ore concentrator, which was valued at $250,000. A new and more efficient mill, with greater capacity, was in operation within 3 months.
In 1903, Washington Water and Power completed building over 80 miles of electrical transmission line between Spokane Falls and Burke, and the company upgraded to electrical machinery. This coincided with the company connecting all of the mines underground, and the completion of the over 12,000 foot Kellogg tunnel. Then, on 10 March 1904, the March ore body was discovered, substantially increasing the mine's reserves. Then, in a 1910 stock deal, Bunker Hill gained outright ownership of the Last Chance mine.
Bunker Hill Co. sold their ASARCO Tacoma smelter to the Guggenheims in 1905, but continued to process their concentrates there, in addition to using the Carnegie Co. and a smelter in Salida, Colorado. Yet, economics dictated Bunker Hill build its own smelter at Smelterville, Idaho, which it began operating on 5 July 1917. An improved concentrating process, which included the use of the Huntington roller mill, Callow screens, and Wilfley tables, produced concentrates of 75%.
A cadmium recovery plant was added to the zinc plant in 1929. This recovery system was replaced in 1945, when the company added a cadmium-processing facility to the smelter, which recovered high-grade cadmium from the smelter's fume and baghouse waste. Also during WWII, Bunker Hill added an antimony electrolytic plant, and because of the manpower shortage, employed about 200 women.
As the mine reached 400 feet below sea level, the company installed a Carrier Mine Spot Cooler. This cooler reduced the temperature from 87 °F (31 °C) to about 80 °F (27 °C), and the relative humidity from 96% to 84%.
In 1947, the mine started using block caving to mine lower grade ore bodies. By 1948, the mill had a 3000 tons per day capacity, the smelter produced almost 10,000 tons of lead per month, the zinc plant had a capacity of over 4000 tons of zinc per month, and the cadmium plant was capable of 50,000 pounds per month. The huge Shea ore body was discovered in 1949, at the No. 17 level.
In 1952, the company added a sulfuric acid plant with a 250-ton per day capacity. Most of this was sold to the J.R. Simplot Corp. for fertilizer use.
In 1981, parent company Gulf Resources & Chemical Corp., which had acquired Bunker Hill in 1968, announced it would close the mine and smelter complex, citing low metal prices, lack of concentrates, and a stricter EPA lead limit of 1.5 micrograms for air quality. At the time of its closure in 1982, the Bunker Hill lead smelter was the largest in the world, and the complex included a zinc plant and silver refinery.
The Coeur d'Alene people were able to regain control of a portion of Lake Coeur d'Alene, after a long history of their interests being ignored.
The over 100 buildings that made up the smelter complex were demolished. On May 27, 1996, the four smokestacks that made up the city skyline, the tallest being 715-feet, were laced with explosives and toppled. Phil Peterson, a man from Nampa, Idaho won a raffle to push the plunger to set off the explosives.
Environmental issues
The process used by the first mills, known as "jigging", was very inefficient, often recovering less than 75% of the metal from the ore. This meant that large amounts of lead and other metals remained in the tailings, which were dumped in nearby waterways. Many of the mine tailings were dumped directly into the Coeur d'Alene River and its tributaries, which became polluted with high levels of sulfur dioxide, lead, and other metals. The water in the river turned opaque gray, earning the stream the nickname "Lead Creek."
In 1899, farmers complained about the mine debris, and by 1910, 65 of them took the company to U.S. District Court. The farmers each received one dollar in damages, with the judge ruling the company could continue to dump debris into the streams. The company did build a tailings dam and later a tailings pond, but continued production despite additional suits. The company joined other mines in forming the Debris Association for litigation defense and payment of some claims.
Before the smelter was constructed, the company knew the smoke and fumes would be an issue, and the lead emissions were a health risk. In the words of the Public Health Service surgeon, Dr. Royd R. Sayers, written in 1918, "Whoever works in or about a lead smelter may become leaded." Yet, the 1924 Idaho Industrial Accident Board stated lead poisoning was an occupational disease not eligible for compensation. In other words, the miners assumed the risk by choosing to work. The company did have a compensation plan for victims, and implemented a Clauge electrolytic treatment in 1919, and a solarium in 1929. In an effort to reduce particles, the company installed a 14-unit Frederick Cottrell electrostatic precipitator, and 2800-bag baghouse to capture dust. In 1936, the company added an Impinger dust collector and an Owens jet-dust counter.
Prompted by a series of newspaper articles published in 1929, the Idaho State legislature formed the Coeur d'Alene River and Lake Commission in 1931. The commission was tasked with eliminating mine waste contaminating the Coeur d'Alene River and entering Lake Coeur d'Alene, a source of drinking water for Harrison, Idaho, and Coeur d'Alene, Idaho. The commission did determine mine tailings were the cause of the pollution, and mine owners were required to provide settling basins and employ a suction dredger at Cataldo, Idaho, starting in 1932. Yet, the commission determined the water was safe to drink, as long as consumption was limited to less than 2.4 gallons per day! Dr. M.M. Ellis of the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries determined the only solution to the pollution in the water system, and consequent lack of fish, was the complete exclusion of dumping mine wastes into the river. Yet, a 1948 deed granted that right to the company. In summary, though everyone, the company, the government, and the public, agreed tailings and smelter smoke polluted the region, the importance of the mine to the economy took precedent.
In the 1950s, the US Forest Service complained that fumes from the zinc plant were killing trees in the Coeur d'Alene National Forest. Yet the company continued to purchase pollution easements, use its political clout with the government, and tell the public that pollution was the cost of economic and employment benefits.
During the 1970s, the Idaho Department of Highways noted that bridges around Kellogg corroded faster.
A fire on 3 Sept. 1973, damaged 2 of the 7 sections in the smelter baghouse. The baghouse was not back in normal operation until 17 March 1974. The company actually increased lead production during this period, taking advantage of increased prices. Lead emissions increased to 35.3 tons per month, compared to 8.3 tons per month from 1955 to 1964. Lead levels in Kellogg-Smelterville had increased to 13.2 micrograms per cubic meter in 1973, compared to 3.9 in 1971. After two Kellogg children were hospitalized for lead poisoning in 1974, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found 22% of the children within one mile of the smelter had lead poisoning, more than 80 micrograms of lead per 0.1 liter of blood, and almost all had more than 40. The Shoshone County Lead Health Project reported in 1975, that 45 children had lead poisoning, with one child having the highest blood lead level ever recorded. Children living in nearby areas began displaying very high blood lead levels. Approximately 26% of the two-year-olds in the region had dangerously high levels of lead in their blood, which had long-term negative consequences for their health, especially intellectual functioning and achievement.
Bunker Hill started employing women in the workforce again in 1972, which eventually included 30 in the smelter and 15 in the zinc plant, and the first to work underground. Yet, in 1975, the company banned fertile women from working in the smelter or zinc plant, due to the inherent risk. This type of ban was later prohibited due to United Automobile Workers v. Johnson Controls, Inc., 499 U.S. 187 (1991), which was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States establishing that private sector policies prohibiting women from knowingly working in potentially hazardous occupations are discriminatory and in violation of Title VII and the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978. The case revolved around Johnson Controls' policy of excluding fertile women from working in battery manufacturing jobs because batteries contain high amounts of lead, which entails health risks to people's reproductive systems (both men and women) and fetuses.
The company started revegetating 18,000 acres in 1972. In April 1975, Bunker Hill stated that employees with blood lead levels higher than 80 micrograms per 0.1 liters, had 90 days to reduce them or be dismissed. However, 1980 Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) rules required the company to remove employees with elevated blood lead levels with no reduction in pay, only allowing them to return when their levels dropped below 60 micrograms per 0.1 liter. Yet, over half of the smelter workforce exceeded 60. Even more stringent OSHA rules were to take effect in 1984.
The company shut down operations for 7 days in Dec. 1975, when it could not meet the EPA standards for SO2. Bunker Hill had started the curtailment program in 1973 to deal with emissions not captured by the sulfuric acid plant. Then in 1976, the company decided to build a 715-foot stack at the lead smelter, and a 610-foot stack at the zinc plant, to better disperse emissions.
In 1983, the Bunker Hill smelter was added to the National Priorities List as a Superfund site by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. As of 2007, the EPA had spent $200 million attempting to remediate the site, much of which was spent removing contaminated topsoil from residential areas. The state of Idaho had also spent funds since the early 1980s on cleanup. While there were measurable improvements in environmental conditions, a vast amount of cleanup and restoration was still required.
Coeur d'Alene 1991 lawsuit for damages and cleanup
In 1991 the Coeur d'Alene Tribe, concerned that progress was too slow at the Superfund site, brought suit against Hecla Mining Company, ASARCO and other companies for damages and recovery of cleanup costs of the site. In 1996 it was joined by the United States in the suit. In 2001 the United States and the Coeur d'Alene litigated a 78-day trial against Hecla and ASARCO over liability issues. In 2008, ASARCO, the other major defendant, reached settlement with the Coeur d'Alene and United States after filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
In 2011 the government, the Coeur d'Alene, and the state of Idaho (which joined the suit to participate in settlement) reached settlement with the Hecla Mining Company to resolve one of the largest cases ever filed under the Superfund statute. Hecla Mining Company will pay $263.4 million plus interest to the United States and other parties to "resolve claims stemming from releases of wastes from its mining operations. Settlement funds will be dedicated to restoration and remediation of natural resources in the Coeur d'Alene Basin." The trustees intend to restore habitat for fish, birds and other natural resources, for stewardship while working for economic progress in the region.

In archaeology and the field of lithic reduction, a burin (from the French burin, meaning "cold chisel" or modern engraving burin) is a type of stone tool, a handheld lithic flake with a chisel-like edge which prehistoric humans used for carving or finishing wood or bone tools or weapons, and sometimes for engraving images.
In archaeology, burin use is often associated with "burin spalls", which are a form of debitage created when toolmakers strike a small flake obliquely from the edge of the burin flake in order to form the graving edge.
Documented use
Standardized burin usage is typical of the Middle Paleolithic and Upper Palaeolithic cultures in Europe, but archaeologists have also identified them in North American cultural assemblages, and in his book Early Man in China, Jia Lanpo of Beijing University lists dihedral burins and burins for truncation among artifacts uncovered along the banks of the Liyigon river near Xujiayao.
Burins can also be associated with compound microblade projectile technology, found with microblade cores and/or microblades. In these cases, their purpose is interpreted as both a rapid retouch and hafting preparation strategy for blade-based edge tools and bifaces and as a class of dedicated flake or blade-based tools used to insert microblades and other microliths into organic armatures.
Types
Multiple types of burin exist.
A type of burin diagnostic of the archaeological stratum where they are found is the "Noailles" burin, named for its original find-site, the Grotte de Noailles, in the commune of Brive-la-Gaillarde, Corrèze, in southwestern France. It consists of a small multiple burin characteristic of the Upper Paleolithic cultural stage called the Gravettian, ca. 28–23,000 BC; these flake tools have been restruck and refined to give several chisellike edges and a blunt, grippable rear edge.
Another type of burin is called the "ordinary burin", which occurs when a burin facet is backed against another burin facet.
A bec-de-flute burin, or "axial burin" began as a long flake, but one of both ends have been knocked off, giving two working facets meeting at an angle.

Bush carpentry is an expression used in Australia and New Zealand that refers to improvised methods of building or repair, using available materials and an ad hoc design, usually in a pioneering or rural context.
The tradition
The phrase 'bush carpentry' is a familiar Australian usage, but finding an exact description of its practice is rare. The Macquarie Dictionary for example, defines a bush carpenter as a rough amateur carpenter, and G. A. Wilkes says he is a rough and ready carpenter. The Macquarie in turn defines rough-and-ready as rough, rude or crude, but good enough for the purpose. Wannan says that a bush carpenter is 'a very rough, unorthodox artisan indeed', and includes a sardonic excerpt from Henry Lawson to exemplify it. In his Bushcraft series Ron Edwards describes hut and furniture building, and 'stockcamp architecture', without once using the phrase 'bush carpentry', though 'rough and ready' recurs. Tocal Agricultural College offers a course in 'Traditional bush timber construction'; The word 'traditional' appears six times in the course outline, but not 'bush carpentry'.
Cox and Lucas, writing in 1978 of Australian pioneer buildings, remarked:
"... perhaps because it has been the symbol of hardship and country toil; perhaps because it was thought too crude and rude to be treated seriously as architecture by the academics ... there have been few books and articles written on the subject ... The vernacular, often, is a fragile architectural form, evolved for expedience and resulting—especially in the case of the more primitive examples—in early decay and disappearance ... designed by an amateur, a builder with little training in design and who will be guided by a strict set of conventions developed within his own locality, perhaps paying some attention to fashion, but local only and certainly not international. Within the vernacular building, function is the dominant factor.
A similar and familiar phrase is traditional bush carpentry; this implies that its principles are well-known, but informally transmitted. Like folk music, bush carpentry exists within an oral and demotic culture, and is often undocumented. The tradition of Australian inventiveness, however, has an extensive literature:
"... vigorous attitudes to innovation prevailed in the Colonies in the nineteenth century and established for Australia some significant technological leads. Lessons from these attitudes both underline the continuing importance of the 'lone inventor' and hold relevance for education, management, and technology policies today."
Henry Lawson, "A Day on a Selection" (1896):
'The dairy is built of rotten box bark—though there is plenty of good stringy-bark within easy distance—and the structure looks as if it wants to lie down and is only prevented by three crooked props on the leaning side; more props will soon be needed in the rear for the dairy shows signs of going in that direction. The milk is set in dishes made of kerosene-tins, cut in halves, which are placed on bark shelves fitted round against the walls. The shelves are not level and the dishes are brought to a comparatively horizontal position by means of chips and bits of bark, inserted under the lower side. The milk is covered by soiled sheets of old newspapers supported on sticks laid across the dishes. This protection is necessary, because the box bark in the roof has crumbled away and left fringed holes—also because the fowls roost up there. Sometimes the paper sags, and the cream may have to be scraped off an article on dairy farming.'
"The bush"
In Australian parlance, 'the bush' includes not only all remote and rural areas, but ways of living there, especially the limitations and hardships endured. Even though remote areas in contemporary Australia are easily reachable by air and modern communications, there remains a mythology of the tyranny of distance: tyranny over comfort, sophistication, over civilization itself. The expression bush carpentry includes two criteria of 'remoteness'. The first, that the builder is separated (by lack of formal training) from regular methods of construction. The second, separation (by physical distance) from regular resources such as milled timber, fasteners, specialized tools, and similar manufactured products. Those in both 'remote' circumstances are forced to invent and improvise. They produce a necessary structure or object via unorthodox procedures, and it will be serviceable, if inelegant in appearance.
Thus, in an Australian suburb today, a self-taught handyman might devise and erect a backyard structure using purchased timber, and practising 'bush carpentry'—a gazebo, a fernery, a children's playhouse for example—while at the same time, a skilled tradesperson, in a distant run of an outback cattle station, might be forced to use heavy tree-trunks, saplings, undressed stone and rusty fencing-wire to construct a stock race.
These two criteria allow the use of manufactured materials—e.g. milled timber—in an irregular manner, and materials other than wood (stone and iron, for example). They exclude the fabrication of large structures like wharves and bridges, built by contracting tradesmen, which incorporate massive tree trunks, even when a manufactured item, e.g. a steel beam, is available (see illustration of Maldon Bridge repaired by government construction team).
Skills
Modern scholarship suggests Australian Aborigines were the first 'bush carpenters'. From the Aborigines, European settlers learned how to strip bark in large sheets from particular tree species, and use this for roofs and walls.
Although there are few specific skills required, each must be well-mastered and neatly executed. Bush carpenters may learn from observing the methods, or the evidence of, another person's work, or entirely through their own invention. The scarcity of any reference books with any local applicability is another factor.
Ron Edwards asserts that no training at all is required. The requisites are 'a calm mind, reasonable health, and a willingness to learn'. Edwards points out that the early settlers built their homes without prior knowledge and experience, and 'many of these buildings are still in existence a century later'. Edwards adds, 'Confidence in your own ability is the first requirement ... the second is access to knowledge.'
In his autobiography, Sam Weller remarked of a young man who had worked for a period as a jackaroo:
"The bush is one of the best educations a young fellow can get if he's interested. That bloke knows livestock, knows how to work them, can cut a straight line with a saw, handle concrete, build a set of yards, fix a motor car—you name it. When you're a hundred miles from town, you can't afford to get a tradesman out for every little job that bobs up. So you've got to slip in and do it yourself ... One of the bosses from a cattle station told me "Sam, if a bloke comes in here in a big hat and ringer boots, he's got a job. They can turn their hands to anything. They know how to work and they don't gutsache all the time."
Tools
The bush carpenter historically possessed few tools, and rarely any specialized tools. Mann's Emigrant's Guide of 1849 suggests that those heading for Australia's unsettled areas take with them a plentiful supply of a wide variety of tools and fasteners, but he lists as the very minimum, 'A hand saw; Axe; Adze; Mortising chisel; Two augers, 1 and 11/4 inch; Two maul rings; Set of wedges; 1 Spade; Pick-axe; Two-foot rule; Chalk line; Square; A Plumb Bob.' A majority of early settlers had formerly been manual labourers, or servicemen, and brought with them a sound practical ability and aptitude for 'making do'; others observed or helped and copied their techniques.
Freeland observes:
'With a saw, an axe, a hammer and a spade on his cart and possibly one of the useful little books on construction written especially for him ... he had to do the best he could with the materials that were to hand wherever he stopped. Helped a little by his book, a fair amount by advice and precedent and a great deal by ingenuity and native wit, the settlers developed a surprising number of variations on standard constructional materials and techniques.'
Ron Edwards' 1987 list of suggested tools to construct 'stockcamp architecture' include only an axe, pliers, a hammer and 'perhaps an auger'. Edwards also demonstrates the technique of the Cobb & Co. hitch for tightening fencing wire that fastens structural elements(See Fig. 2 below).
With the upsurge in Australia of the restoration of so-called 'Heritage items', the techniques of Australian bush carpentry may be moving closer to formal identification and categorization. Tocal College's 2002 list of tools for its 'Traditional bush timber construction' course includes the broadaxe, adze, sledge hammer and wedges, morticing axe, froe and mallet, draw knife, and hand auger.
Design and materials
Structures or objects such as furniture created using bush carpentry techniques often have minimal or even an ad hoc design. Projects built according to properly drawn plans, for example, architectural blueprints, cannot be called examples of bush carpentry. The design of a barn or shed is likely to be intuitive and functional; the settler's slab hut derived from the vernacular English crofter's hut, a simple rectangular walled shelter with one door, and perhaps holes to allow air to enter.
Historically, the materials at hand for Australian settlers usually included a plentiful supply of hardwood, in the form of fully-grown trees and saplings, bark, brush or grass, clay, mud and stone. The classic Australian bush carpentry image is the forked tree trunk used as an upright.
Nails, bolts or screws were often not available; wooden pegs, wire, or strips of greenhide might be used as fasteners. Greenhide strips might also be used as hinges for doors or shutters. Ron Edwards comments that 'Fencing wire was a very popular resource because it was always available. Bolts and long nails were expensive, and had to be ordered from town ... a shed or stockyard would be fastened together with wire and would be stronger than one that was nailed.'
Less usual building materials include flattened steel kerosene containers used as wall cladding, or such containers filled with sand and used as building blocks. Sheets of hessian have also been used as walls, for coolness.
The etymology of the word carpenter shows that it derives from 'a carriage maker', and later, 'one who builds frameworks'; thus, the term 'bush carpentry' does not necessarily imply that wood is the only material involved.
Examples of bush carpentry in situ
Influence on Australian architecture and art
Cox & Freeland believe that early structures created using bush carpentry had a profound influence on Australian industrial architecture:
"Because they are uncomplicated buildings, built by unlettered people in the most direct way, using the materials readily to hand, they often have a character and honesty that are rare and sometimes missing from
their more erudite architectural betters. Because they are made of a material with which everyone has a deep-rooted harmony, because they are put together in ways that are easily understood and because their forms are readily comprehended, they are universal buildings whose roughness and even whose frequent dilapidation give them a powerful emotional appeal and impact. They are buildings to be felt rather than reasoned ... Cement works, mines, the railways and factories spawned a large variety of store houses and storage bins, towers and poppet heads, workshops and condensers. Framed up in peeled tree trunks or massive balks of hardwood bolted together, their skeletons of columns, beams and braces had the same forthrightness and frankness of the rural buildings ... sited out in the country where they would seldom be seen, or in ugly industrial areas, or along the waterfront where buildings were not expected to be beautiful they, like the rural buildings, were built with an eye solely to meeting their utilitarian purpose in the most direct and purposeful way. Because of this, they frequently succeeded in being outstandingly beautiful. Through the industrial buildings, the functional tradition of the countryside unknowingly and unconsciously was passed into the twentieth century.
The cartoons of Eric Jolliffe, especially those based on his character Saltbush Bill include many examples of bush carpentry; the farm where much of Saltbush Bill is set has houses, furniture and other rural structures—barns, stockyards, gallows—all built using bush carpentry means and materials. Joliffe set himself the task of preserving much of Australia's rural heritage by producing sketches and paintings of such structures.
In Australian literature and music
There is often a sardonic or comical note in Australian fiction when bush carpentry is mentioned or described; possibly because there is no comedy or satire residing in competency.
Rolf Boldrewood's Robbery Under Arms(1881) is an exception:
'... It was a snug hut enough, for father was a good bush carpenter, and didn't turn his back to any one for splitting and fencing, hut-building and shingle-splitting; he had had a year or two at sawing, too ... he took great pride ... and said it was the best-built hut within fifty miles. He split every slab, cut every post and wallplate and rafter himself, with a man to help him at odd times; and after the frame was up, and the bark on the roof, he camped underneath and finished every bit of it – chimney, flooring, doors, windows, and partitions – by himself.'
Henry Lawson, "The Darling River" (1900):
"The boat we were on was built and repaired above deck after the different ideas of many bush carpenters, of whom the last seemed by his work to have regarded the original plan with a contempt only equalled by his disgust at the work of the last carpenter but one. The wheel was boxed in, mostly with round sapling-sticks fastened to the frame with bunches of nails and spikes of all shapes and sizes, most of them bent. The general result was decidedly picturesque in its irregularity, but dangerous to the mental welfare of any passenger who was foolish enough to try to comprehend the design; for it seemed as though every carpenter had taken the opportunity to work in a little abstract idea of his own.
In Steele Rudd's, Back at Our Selection, (1906) the sequence of stories beginning with "Dave's New House" and ending with "Dad Forgets the Past" have a socio-historical sub-text emphasizing the progress of rural Australia from pioneering to prosperity. In the first story, Dad Rudd, though now a wealthy farmer, builds Dave and his new wife Lily a house, using materials salvaged from a neighbour's derelict slab hut. Dad still thinks like a pioneer: he constructs the house himself, using only the materials available, and spending little or no money. However, Lily's mother is outraged that her daughter is expected to live in 'a pile of dirty old slabs and shingles ... a hole!' Dad Rudd is shamed into hiring proper building contractors and erecting a fine cottage, at a cost of 'three hundred pounds'; indeed, in freeing himself from the penuriousness he knew as a penniless settler, Dad over-furnishes Dave's house such that even Mother 'shook her head disapprovingly'.
E. O. Schlunke's The Enthusiastic Prisoner (1955) shows two bush carpenters at work. One is a lazy Australian farmer who is assigned an Italian prisoner of war as a laborer. The Italian is far more energetic, and tackles dozens of neglected farming tasks, becoming in effect the manager. In one episode, they re-roof a shed using bush carpentry:
'When they climbed the roof Pietro discovered that half the sheets were loose. Henry gave him the nails and directed him to nail down the flapping sheet. But Pietro was hunting round for causes. He discovered that the rafters were rotting and demonstrated it by giving one a hard hit with the hammer. It split from end to end and a couple of sheets immediately blew off the roof.
They spent the afternoon cutting trees in the scrub and trimming them for rafters, though nothing had been farther from Henry's intention and inclination. He cut down a few little trees while Pietro cut a lot of big ones. Pietro always took the heavier end when they loaded the rails, but even so, Henry became exhausted. Round about four o'clock he decided to go home.
"Sufficient", he said.
Pietro consulted a diagram he had made.
"No sufficient", he said. "Ancora four."
... They finished re-roofing the shed by the week-end. Pietro wanted to know if they would cut some fence-posts next week to repair the fences. Henry thought of how he would suffer if he had to work on the other end of a cross-cut saw with a tireless bear like Pietro.
"No", he said, "some other work."
But he didn't like the way Pietro looked at him, so he decided to hide the cross-cut saw.'
The folk song Stringbark and Greenhide describes successful bush carpentry using both these materials:
If you want to build a hut, to keep out wind and weather,
Stringy bark will make it snug, and keep it well together;
Greenhide, if it's used by you, will make it all the stronger,
For if you tie it with greenhide, it's sure to last the longer.
The folk song Old Bark Hut is of another opinion:
In the summertime when the weather's warm this hut is nice and cool
And you'll find the gentle breezes blowing in through every hole
You can leave the old door open or you can leave it shut
There's no fear of suffocation in the old bark hut
In an old bark hut in an old bark hut
There's no fear of suffocation in the old bark hut.
Shacks, cabins and weekenders
From the 1920s to the 1970s, the average Australian family aimed to own a 'weekender', in addition to their suburban dwelling. (In New Zealand, a weekender is known as a bach). On a block of land close to a beach, near a coastal village, or other place of recreation like a river, lake or mountain, a family might erect a 'shack', or cabin, usually with their own hands, often using materials brought from their city residence, or obtained nearby. Shacks and cabins used as weekenders were sometimes built illegally, in remote or inaccessible areas, for example, within National Parks. Weekenders were not always constructed according to the local council's building code; they were often excellent examples of bush carpentry.
Government organizations usually ignored the presence and the irregular construction of such weekenders, provided the users behaved responsibly. Municipal councils did not charge these shack-builders rates, and did not provide services like water supply, power, sewerage or garbage disposal. By the 1980s, however, as Australia's population increased, many former coastal villages had become towns, or the suburbs of nearby towns. Many Australians had retired to live cheaply in their weekender, placing increasing pressure on local infrastructure and community services. Increasing pressure was then placed on the owners and occupiers of weekenders to destroy or replace their shack with a properly constructed dwelling.
The founding of the National Parks and Wildlife Service in 1967 introduced a policy of cabin removal. Owners have subsequently sought to have their cabins declared heritage structures, 'uncommon and endangered examples of vernacular weekender architecture construction' and of 'the limitations imposed by the natural environment and isolated location' i.e. examples of bush carpentry.
Notes and references
Notes
References
Bibliography and further reading
Archer, Cameron, et al. 2002. Conservation of Timber Buildings and Fences at Tocal. C. B. Alexander College, Tocal. ISBN 0-7313-0557-4
Archer, John. 1996. The Great Australian Dream: the history of the Australian house. HarperCollins, Pymble. ISBN 0-207-19003-8
Baker, Sidney J. 1966. The Australian Language: an examination of the English language and English speech as used in Australia, from convict days to the present ... Currawong, Sydney.
Berry, D.W. & Gilbert, S.H. 1981. Pioneer Building Techniques in South Australia. Adelaide, Gilbert-Partners, ISBN 0-9594160-0-5
Cox, P., & Freeland, J. 1969. Rude timber buildings in Australia. Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-34035-8
Cox, P., & Lucas, C. 1978. Australian Colonial Architecture. Lansdowne. ISBN 1-86302-343-7
Baglin, Douglass, Mullins, Barbara. 1973. Rough as Guts Eclipse, Dee Why. ISBN 978-0-85895-088-7
Edwards, Ron. 1988. Bushcraft 1: Australian Traditional Bush Crafts. Rams Skull Press, Kuranda. ISBN 0-909901-74-0
Edwards, Ron. 1988. Bushcraft 2: Skills of the Australian Bushman. Rams Skull Press, Kuranda. ISBN 0-909901-75-9
Edwards, Ron. 1987. Bushcraft 3: More Australian Traditional Bush Crafts. Rams Skull Press, Kuranda. ISBN 0-909901-67-8
Fearn-Wannan, W. 1970. Australian Folklore: a Dictionary of Lore, Legends and Popular Allusions Lansdowne, Melbourne. ISBN 0-7018-0088-7. p. 109.
Freeland, J. M. 1974. Architecture in Australia. Pelican, 1974.
Herman, Morton. 1954. The Early Australian Architects and Their Work. Angus and Robertson, Sydney.
Mann, Robert James. 1849. Mann's emigrant's guide to Australia : including the colonies of New South Wales, Port Philip, South Australia, Western Australia, and Moreton Bay London : William Strange.
Moyal, A. 1987. "Invention and Innovation in Australia: the historian's lens". Prometheus, Volume 5, Issue 1, pp 92–110
Rudd, Steele. 1973. Our New Selection; Sandy's Selection; Back at Our Selection. Lloyd O'Neil, Sydney. See ISBN 0-85558-416-5
Troy, P. (ed.) 2000. A History of European Housing in Australia. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-77733-X
Walker, M. 1978. Pioneer Crafts of Early Australia. Macmillan, Melbourne. ISBN 0-333-25191-1
Weller, Sam. 1979. Old Bastards I Have Met. Sampal Investments, Charters Towers.
Welsh, Peter. Woodworking Tools 1600–1900 At Project Gutenberg.
Wilkinson, G. B. 1849. The working man's handbook to South Australia, with advice to the farmer, and detailed information for the several class of labourers and artisans. London : Murray.

Bushcraft is the use and practice of skills to survive and thrive in a natural environment. Bushcraft skills include foraging, hunting, fishing, firecraft, and tying knots. Woodcraft is a subset of bushcraft that focuses on survival skills for use in woodland or forest environments. Fieldcraft is a military or tactical form of bushcraft.
Skills
Bushcraft skills provide basic necessities for human life: food (through foraging, tracking, hunting, trapping, fishing), water sourcing and purification, shelter-building, and firecraft. These may be supplemented with expertise in twine-making, knots and lashings, wood-carving, campcraft, medicine/health, natural navigation, and tool and weapon making.
Bushcraft includes skill with tools such as bushcraft knives and axes. A skilled bushcrafter can use these tools to create many different things, from dugout canoes to A-frame shelters.
Purpose-built shelters such as tents are commonly used in the wilderness. Tents can also be improvised from a large tarp or blanket. Indigenous shelters include a snow cave or bark lean-to. Natural shelters include caves, the space underneath a tree, or within thickets.
Knot-tying is an important bushcraft skill. Commonly used knots include the reef knot, figure-8 loop, improved clinch knot, clove hitch, and snare noose. The reef knot is also referred to as a square knot. It is good for bundling items together because one can tension the rope during the first part of the knot tying. Tying bandages together like a sling is a common use. The figure-8 loop forms a loop that will not draw tight. It can be used at the end of a fishing line to tie on a hook or lure. This knot is also useful to hold loads or to lift or drag items. The improved clinch knot is often used to attach a hook to a line or to attach an anchor to a rope, or for tying something to a pole or tree. The clove hitch can be used when creating a raft or to attach a shelter to a tree. It is commonly used to start a lashing, binding one thing to another such as a shelter frame. The snare noose is commonly used to catch animals. The snare consists of a noose attached to an anchor point like a shrub. As the animal moves through the noose, the line will tighten around its neck.
Etymology
The term bushcraft originally referred to skills used in the Australian bush. The word has been used in its current sense in Australia and South Africa at least as far back as the 1800s. Bush in this sense is probably a direct adoption of the Dutch bosch (now bos; transl. "forest" ), originally used in Dutch colonies for woodland and country covered with natural wood, but extended to usage in British colonies to refer to uncleared or un-farmed districts, still in a state of nature. Later this was used by extension for the country as opposed to the town. In Southern Africa, they get Bushman from the Dutch boschjesman applied by the Dutch colonists to the natives living in the bush. In North America, where there was also considerable colonisation by the Dutch, they have the word bushwacker which is close to the Dutch bosch-wachter (now boswachter) meaning "forest keeper" or "forest ranger".
Historically, the term has been spotted in the following books (amongst others):
Preliminary titles for The Art of Travel by Francis Galton, published in 1854, included Bushcraft or Science of Travel and Bushcraft or the Shifts and Science of Travel in Other Countries
The History of Australian Exploration from 1788 to 1888 by Ernest Favenc; published in 1888.
My Brilliant Career by Miles Franklin; published in 1901.
Campaign Pictures of the War in South Africa (1899–1900) by A. G. Hales; published in 1901.
The Explorers of Australia and their Life-work by Ernest Favenc; published in 1908.
We of the Never-Never by Jeannie Gunn; published in 1908.
The Life of Captain Matthew Flinders by Ernest Scott; published in 1914.
The term was popularized in the Southern Hemisphere by Les Hiddins (the Bush Tucker Man) and in the Northern Hemisphere by Mors Kochanski. It more recently gained currency in the United Kingdom due to the popularity of Ray Mears and his bushcraft and survival television programs.
Trademark
The word bushcraft was registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office as a trademark by Bushcraft USA LLC on November 12, 2013, as a service mark, for "Providing an on-line forum for bushcraft," and "Providing on-line forums for transmission of messages among computer users concerning bushcraft" (Ser. No. 85690815). This led to some concern about the validity of the mark among Internet users who asserted there were senior uses of the mark in a more general context such as Mors Kochanski as early as 1981, however no formal opposition was ever filed, nor any assertion of continuous use in commerce as the mark related to Internet forums. As of 2021, Bushcraft USA has not publicly enforced its mark against other Internet forums using the term.
Promoters
The Irish-born Australian writer Richard Graves titled his outdoor manuals "The 10 bushcraft books".
Canadian wilderness instructor Mors Kochanski published the "Northern Bushcraft" book in 1981 and an expanded edition of the book in 1988. He has stated on numerous occasions that book title was an explicit reference to Graves' work.
The term has enjoyed a recent popularity largely thanks to Ray Mears, Cody Lundin, Les Hiddins, Les Stroud, Dave Canterbury and Mors Kochanski and their television programs.

A butterfly joint, also called a bow tie, dovetail key, Dutchman joint, or Nakashima joint, is a type of joint or inlay used to hold two or more pieces of wood together. These types of joints are mainly used for aesthetics, but they can also be used to reinforce cracks in pieces of wood, doors, picture frames, or drawers.
A dovetail key resembles two dovetails connected at the narrow part. A negative of the hole is cut out of the board the butterfly will be placed in and the butterfly is then fitted, keeping the joint together. The wood used for the butterfly is usually a contrasting wood, often walnut.
History
Dutchman Joint
The term Dutchman is used when a patch or inlay covers a miss-cut or an imperfect piece of wood. A Dutchman can also cover a knot in the wood. A Dutchman can be wood or metal. The name originated in San Francisco after the gold rush, when all types of European craftsmen came to California to earn a living. The term Dutchman is slang given to the woodworking process of inserting patches. The term has been found in the literature of John Russell Bartlett, in the Dictionary of Americanisms, and in Edward H. Knight's American Mechanical Dictionary.
Dovetail Key
In 1894, Jacques De Morgan discovered a group of boats at the pyramid complex of Khakaure Senwosret III at Dahshur. Butterfly, or dovetail, joints were recorded as being used. Some archaeologists argue that the dovetail joints were not originally fitted for the boats but were a modern replacement. The dovetail joints appear to have been set into the faces of the planks after the excavation, to provide strength so that they would not fall apart during transport. The craftsmanship of the joints was different than in the rest of the boats, and because they were not fixed in place, any type of force could cause the joint to fall out. There was also no mention of the joints in Morgan's original notes, written when he first saw the boats. It is unlikely that he would have missed them if they were present. There have been reports of traditional Japanese boats using butterfly cramps but these were held in place by shellac.
Modern use
Contemporary decorative dovetail keys are commonly seen in and associated with the work of George Nakashima. George Nakashima, a Japanese-American woodworker, made the butterfly joint famous in the 1950s. He incorporated it into his nature-inspired woodworking pieces. Nakashima's idea was not to change the wood, but only to enhance its beauty.

A cabinet is a case or cupboard with shelves or drawers for storing or displaying items. Some cabinets are stand alone while others are built in to a wall or are attached to it like a medicine cabinet. Cabinets are typically made of wood (solid or with veneers or artificial surfaces), coated steel (common for medicine cabinets), or synthetic materials. Commercial grade cabinets usually have a melamine-particleboard substrate and are covered in a high-pressure decorative laminate commonly referred to as Wilsonart or Formica.
Cabinets sometimes have one or more doors on the front, which are mounted with door hardware, and occasionally a lock. Cabinets may have one or more doors, drawers, or shelves. Short cabinets often have a finished surface on top that can be used for display, or as a working surface, such as the countertops found in kitchens.
A cabinet intended to be used in a bedroom and with several drawers typically placed one above another in one or more columns intended for clothing and small articles is called a dresser or a chest of drawers. A small bedside cabinet is more frequently called a nightstand or night table. A tall cabinet intended for clothing storage including hanging of clothes is called a wardrobe or an armoire, or (in some countries) a closet if built-in.
History
Before the advent of industrial design, cabinet makers were responsible for the conception and the production of any piece of furniture. In the last half of the 18th century, cabinet makers, such as Thomas Sheraton, Thomas Chippendale, Shaver and Wormley Brothers Cabinet Constructors, and George Hepplewhite, also published books of furniture forms. These books were compendiums of their designs and those of other cabinet makers. The most famous cabinetmaker before the advent of industrial design is probably André-Charles Boulle (11 November 1642 – 29 February 1732) and his legacy is known as "Boulle work" and the École Boulle, a college of fine arts and crafts and applied arts in Paris, today bears testimony to his art.
With the Industrial Revolution and the application of steam power to cabinet making tools, mass production techniques were gradually applied to nearly all aspects of cabinet making, and the traditional cabinet shop ceased to be the main source of furniture, domestic or commercial. In parallel to this evolution there came a growing demand by the rising middle class in most industrialised countries for finely made furniture. This eventually grew the total number of traditional cabinet makers.
Before 1650, fine furniture was a rarity in Western Europe and North America. Generally, people did not need it and for the most part could not afford it. They made do with simple but serviceable pieces.
The Arts and Crafts movement which started in the United Kingdom in the middle of the 19th century spurred a market for traditional cabinet making, and other craft goods. It rapidly spread to the United States and to all the countries in the British Empire. This movement exemplified the reaction to the eclectic historicism of the Victorian era and to the 'soulless' machine-made production which was starting to become widespread. During this time, cabinetry was said to be one of the most noble and admirable skills by nearly one fourth of the population of the United Kingdom, and 31% of those who believed this strived for their children to learn the art of cabinetry.
After World War II woodworking became a popular hobby among the middle classes. The more serious and skilled amateurs in this field now turn out pieces of furniture which rival the work of professional cabinet makers. Together, their work now represents but a small percentage of furniture production in any industrial country, but their numbers are vastly greater than those of their counterparts in the 18th century and before.
Schools of design
Glamour
Glamour style was originally a combination of English, Greek Revival, French Regency and Hollywood glamour. The main colours of glam cabinets can follow high impact or soft and luxurious directions. The most important feature of this style is the combination of lighter neutral tones with intense, sharp dark shades such as black, navy blue and jewel tones. The main features of glamour in cabinetry are:
Metallic frames (gold or silver)
Dark, shiny finishes
Crystal and metal ornaments and accessories (for example glamour cabinet handles with crystal elements)
Aesthetics in tones of gold with glossy white and mirrored black
Sculptural lines
Scandinavian
This style of design is typified by clean horizontal and vertical lines. Compared to other designs there is a distinct absence of ornamentation. While Scandinavian design is easy to identify, it is much more about the materials than the design.
French Provincial
This style of design is ornate. French Provincial objects are often stained or painted, leaving the wood concealed. Corners and bevels are often decorated with gold leaf or given some other kind of gilding. Flat surfaces often have artwork such as landscapes painted directly on them. The wood used in French provincial varied, but was often originally beech.
Early American Colonial
This design emphasises both form and materials. Early American chairs and tables are often constructed with turned spindles and chair backs often constructed using steaming to bend the wood. Wood choices tend to be deciduous hardwoods with a particular emphasis on the wood of edible or fruit-bearing trees such as cherry or walnut.
Rustic
The rustic style of design sometimes called "log furniture" or "log cabin" is the least finished. Design is very utilitarian yet seeks to feature not only the materials used but in, as much as possible, how they existed in their natural state. For example, a table top may have what is considered a "live edge" that allows you to see the original contours of the tree that it came from. It also often uses whole logs or branches including the bark of the tree. Rustic furniture is often made from pine, cedar, fir and spruce. Rustic furniture is usually very simple, handmade and oversized. It is characterised by a bit of roughness (raw woods which look a bit undone). Colors connected with earthy tones: grays, greens and browns are very common here. See Adirondack Architecture.
Mission style
Mission design is characterised by straight, thick horizontal and vertical lines and flat panels. The most common material used in Mission furniture is oak. For early mission cabinetmakers, the material of choice was white oak, which they often darkened through a process known as "fuming". Hardware is often visible on the outside of the pieces and made of black iron. It is a style that became popular in the early 20th century; popularised by designers in the Arts and Crafts and Art Nouveaux movements.
Oriental
Also known as Asian design, this style of furniture is characterised by its use of materials such as bamboo and rattan. Red is a frequent colour choice along with landscape art and Chinese or other Asian language characters on the pieces.
Shaker
Shaker furniture design is focused on function and symmetry. Because it is so influenced by an egalitarian religious community and tradition it is rooted in the needs of the community versus the creative expression of the designer. Like Early American and Colonial design, Shaker craftsmen often chose fruit woods for their designs. Pieces reflect a very efficient use of materials.
Types of cabinetry
The fundamental focus of the cabinet maker is the production of cabinetry. Although the cabinet maker may also be required to produce items that would not be recognized as cabinets, the same skills and techniques apply.
A cabinet may be built-in or free-standing. A built-in cabinet is usually custom made for a particular situation and it is fixed into position, on a floor, against a wall, or framed in an opening. For example, modern kitchens are examples of built-in cabinetry. Free-standing cabinets are more commonly available as off-the-shelf items and can be moved from place to place if required. Cabinets may be wall hung or suspended from the ceiling. Cabinet doors may be hinged or sliding and may have mirrors on the inner or outer surface.
Cabinets may have a face frame or may be of frameless construction (also known as European or euro-style). Face frame cabinets have a supporting frame attached to the front of the cabinet box. This face frame is usually 1+1⁄2 inches (4 cm) in width. Mounted on the cabinet frame is the cabinet door. In contrast, frameless cabinet have no such supporting front face frame, the cabinet doors attach directly to the sides of the cabinet box. The box's side, bottom and top panels are usually 5⁄8 to 3⁄4 inch (15 to 20 mm) thick, with the door overlaying all but 1⁄16 inch (2 mm) of the box edge.
Modern cabinetry is often frameless and is typically constructed from man-made sheet materials, such as plywood, chipboard or medium-density fibreboard (MDF). The visible surfaces of these materials are usually clad in a timber veneer, plastic laminate, or other material. They may also be painted.
Cabinetry found in the kitchen
Cabinetry, fundamental usage, ergonomics, and construction of cabinetry found in the kitchen varies geographically. In the United States, cabinetry in the kitchen typically consists of upper, or wall cabinets, and base cabinets.
Regarding cabinets produced by cabinet manufacturers, base cabinets are sized at a standard 24" deep, front to back, and wall cabinets are typically constructed at a depth of 12" front to back. Standard height of a base cabinet is amongst manufactures is 34.5". According to design guidelines of the National Kitchen & Bath Association, known as the NKBA, the height from the counter top surface to the bottom of the upper cabinets should be no less than 15" in clearance. Wall cabinets are manufactured in a variety of heights based on the storage needs and allowable height within the specific kitchen. Common overall heights for wall cabinets are 30", 36" and 42". 30" and 36" is often used with North American ceiling heights of 8' or less. 42" heights are often used with 9' ceilings. These options are typically design based.
Cabinet widths for base cabinets normally start at 9", and can be as large as 45". Wall cabinets will typically start at a width of 12", and be as large as 42". Sizing increments for both wall and base cabinets are a standard of 3".
Construction
Cabinet boxes produced for kitchens are typically made of wood derivatives such as MDF, plywood, or particle board. The cabinet box will most often have a wood veneer to finish the interior. Cabinet door and drawer face material will depend on the manufacturer. Often a natural wood such as maple, oak, ash, birch, cherry, or alder will be used as a material that is intended to be finished with a stain or other transparent or semi-transparent finish. MDF has been the primary choice among manufacturers to be used on a solid finish painted surface.
Cabinet components
Bases
Cabinets which rest on the floor are supported by some base. This base could be a fully enclosed base (i.e. a plinth), a scrolled based, bracket feet or it could be a set of legs.
Adjustable feet
A type of adjustable leg has been adopted from the European cabinet system which offers several advantages. First off, in making base cabinets for kitchens, the cabinet sides would be cut to 34½ inches, yielding four cabinet side blanks per 4 foot by 8 foot sheet. Using the adjustable feet, the side blanks are cut to 30 inches, thus yielding six cabinet side per sheet.
These feet can be secured to the bottom of the cabinet by having the leg base screwed onto the cabinet bottom. They can also be attached by means of a hole drilled through the cabinet bottom at specific locations. The legs are then attached to the cabinet bottom by a slotted, hollow machine screw. The height of the cabinet can be adjusted from inside the cabinet, simply by inserting a screwdriver into the slot and turning to raise or lower the cabinet. The holes in the cabinet are capped by plastic inserts, making the appearance more acceptable for residential cabinets. Using these feet, the cabinets need not be shimmed or scribed to the floor for leveling. The toe kick board is attached to the cabinet by means of a clip, which is either screwed onto the back side of the kick board, or a barbed plastic clip is inserted into a saw kerf, also made on the back side of the kick board. This toe kick board can be made to fit each base cabinet, or made to fit a run of cabinets.
Kitchen cabinets, or any cabinet generally at which a person may stand, usually have a fully enclosed base in which the front edge has been set back 75 mm or so to provide room for toes, known as the kick space. A scrolled base is similar to the fully enclosed base but it has areas of the base material removed, often with a decorative pattern, leaving feet on which the cabinet stands. Bracket feet are separate feet, usually attached in each corner and occasionally for larger pieces in the middle of the cabinet.
Compartments
A cabinet usually has at least one compartment. Compartments may be open, as in open shelving; they may be enclosed by one or more doors; or they may contain one or more drawers. Some cabinets contain secret compartments, access to which is generally not obvious.
Modern cabinets employ many more complicated means (relative to a simple shelf) of making browsing lower cabinets more efficient and comfortable. One example is the lazy susan, a shelf which rotates around a central axis, allowing items stored at the back of the cabinet to be brought to the front by rotating the shelf. These are usually used in corner cabinets, which are larger and deeper and have a greater "dead space" at the back than other cabinets.
Cabinet insert hardware
An alternative to the lazy susan, particularly in base cabinets, is the blind corner cabinet pull out unit. These pull out and turn, making the attached shelving unit slide into the open area of the cabinet door, thus making the shelves accessible to the user. These units make usable what was once dead space.
Other insert hardware includes such items as mixer shelves that pull out of a base cabinet and spring into a locked position at counter height. This hardware aids in lifting these somewhat heavy mixers and assists with positioning the unit for use. More and more components are being designed to enable specialized hardware to be used in standard cabinet carcasses.
Tops
Most cabinets incorporate a top of some sort. In many cases, the top is merely to enclose the compartments within and serves no other purpose—as in a wall hung cupboard for example. In other cabinets, the top also serves as a work surface—a kitchen countertop for example.

Calciothermic reactions are metallothermic reduction reactions (more generally, thermic chemical reactions) which use calcium metal as the reducing agent at high temperature.
Calcium is one of the most potent reducing agents available, usually drawn as the strongest oxidic reductant in Ellingham diagrams, though the lanthanides best it in this respect in oxide processes. On the other hand, this trend does not continue to other compounds that are non-oxides, and for instance lanthanum is produced by the calciothermic reduction of the chloride, calcium being a more potent reducing agent than lanthanum involving chlorides.
Calciothermic processes are used in the extraction of metals such as uranium, zirconium, and thorium from oxide ores.
An interesting way of performing calciothermic reductions is by in-situ generated metallic calcium, dissolved in molten calcium chloride, as shown in the FFC Cambridge Process.

Callaïs are ancient green-blue precious stones used for making pendants and beads by western European cultures of the later Neolithic and early Bronze Age. "Callaïs" is a generic term that includes turquoise and variscite, but not jade. It was described by Pliny the Elder as being paler than lapis lazuli. Callaïs objects have been found in Neolithic tombs from the mid-5th millennium BC in the Carnac region of western France.
Callaïs deposits are thought to have been widely distributed throughout the Iberian peninsula, and transported from Andalusia, Castile, and Catalonia to Brittany, Normandy, and the Paris Basin.

Caloian (also Calian(i), Caloiță, Scaloian, Gherman, or Iene) was a rainmaking and fertility rite in Romania, similar in some ways to Dodola. Its namesake is a clay effigy, whose sculpting, funeral, exhumation, and eventual destruction are centerpieces of the display. The source of this ritual, as is the case with those of many other local popular beliefs and practices, precedes the introduction of Christianity, although it came in time to be associated with Orthodox Easter or with the Feast of the Ascension. In some variants it was performed on a precisely calculated day two to three weeks after Easter, though local communities could also revive it at other times of the year, specifically during drought. The figurine was generally made from clay and most often by girls, though sometimes also by boys or married women; the ceremony itself would draw in the whole village community as spectators, and, in isolated cases, also had active participation from the Romanian Orthodox clergy. The mimicry of Christian funerals was widespread, but absent from the more established forms of the ritual.
Before dying out in the 1990s, the Caloian tradition had possibly survived for millennia, and may have originated with Dacian strands of Paleo-Balkan mythology. It evoked memories of human sacrifice for the appeasement of rain deities, with parallel near-sacrifices of girls being still attested in rural Romania during the first half of the 20th century. The Caloian litany, which exists in various arrangements as a sample of primitive Romanian literature, usually refers to the figure being sent off to the skies to unlock rain, and buried so that it may be reborn. The figurine's mother is hinted at in such poems, and in some cases played by one of the girls attending the funeral procession.
Caloian events were largely confined to Muntenia, Oltenia and Northern Dobruja (the southern part of Romania), though they have been well attested in specific parts of Western Moldavia. Similar practices, assigning usually female characteristics and names to the clay figurine, are spread throughout other parts of the Romanian-speaking areal. They form a continuum of traditions with both Dodola and Germenchuk, which are staples of Bulgarian folklore. Intermingling with the latter is attested in Caloian's primary spread along the Danube, but also in its supposed etymology, which reveals either a Slavonic term for "dirt" or a folkloric nod to Ioannitsa (Ioniță) Kaloyan. The ritual has also been adopted and adapted by ethno-cultural minorities, including the Gagauz and the Csángós.
Ritual
Spring variant
Caloian had a spring version, which often occurred on the "third Tuesday after Easter", and concluded on the following Thursday. Folklorists Ion H. Ciubotaru an Silvia Ciubotaru write that having fixed days for Caloian during Easter was "wholly exceptional" in a Moldavian context; they also indicate one other variant in which Caloian coincided with the first Thursday after Easter. As noted by ethnologist Anca Ceaușescu, this variant was specifically a fertility rite, which was mostly tied to spring and renewal, rather than to the celebration of Easter itself. She records instances where Caloian was performed on the sixth week after Easter, on Thomas Sunday, or "always around May 8". Children up to the age of 12 were preferred for performing the ritual, owing to their "ritual purity", and in some cases only selected to fit into an odd number. Performers are most often described as young girls, and sometimes boys, though folklorist Teodor Burada, who speaks from a Western Moldavian perspective, also records the occasional involvement of married women. According to Ciubotaru and Ciubotaru, a situation idealized in the more traditional forms of the Caloian was that in which the people involved were girls around the age of nine, or adolescent virgins, who were either sisters or first cousins. Men remained strictly prohibited for most of Caloian's history.
Depending on the communities involved, the Caloian was regarded as an infant, a grown child, or an adult. His effigy was put together from fresh yellow clay, and sometimes also mud, old rags, or wax. The latter two variants are described by the Ciubotarius as modern improvisations. In most versions, the end result would reach 50 cm (20 in) in length, though some stood as tall as "a seven-year-old child." As Burada notes, the Caloian makers made sure to present it in a mortuary pose, with hands crossed on the chest; sometimes, a secondary figure, the "female" Caloiță, would be added. Also according to Burada, the clay would be adorned with basil and the red-colored shells of Easter eggs, then placed inside a small coffin. The Easter egg variant remained well attested in the local culture of Niculițel, though other accounts refer to the Caloian being dressed in flowers and made to hold up a candle; a cross was placed near its head. Moldavian variants make ample and "homeopathic" use of plants which grow on or near bodies of water—reeds, but also burdock, dwarf elder, butterbur, and fleaworts. Folklorist Ion I. Drăgoescu reported a form of the ritual as seen in Potlogi, where the Caloian (known here exclusively as Caloiță) is made from dough, and its coffin carved out of a pumpkin shell.
The group would then proceed to bury the Caloian "outside the village, either out in the shrubland, or in some secluded area of the woods, or alongside a body of water, if such are located within proximity of the village." In some documented cases, the burial spot was specifically chosen as the line separating two villages or at crossroads, which were also "mythical places, spaces allowing for the communication between two worlds". The choice of such locations "enhances the magic in the act of burial". In the oldest variants, Christian symbolism is scarcely present in the funeral ceremony, and the procession is limited to girls wearing leaves of dwarf elder for clothes. During the ceremony as witnessed by Burada, a girl would act and dress as the officiating priest, while another one would hold up the ceremonial flag (prapur), comprising a tall stick and a white handkerchief. The cortege would include mourners, who perform a mock-litany. The Romanian Academy's treatise on Romanian literature (Istoria literaturii romîne, 1964) describes this as sung to "its own tune, a syllabic one, almost recitative in its rhythm." The spring variant, as recorded in Burada, reads:
Some informants and some variants of the rhyme are specific about the burial being done to ensure regeneration. They address the Caloian with reassurances such as "we put you into the ground so that you'll turn green". Other forms include more classical litanies, mourning the Caloian's "little girly body" (trupușor de cuconiță). In such variants, girl mourners rubbed onion slices over their eyes, to produce genuine tears.
In Burada's account, the Caloian was left buried for the following Wednesday, with the group returning on Thursday for the exhumation. The recovered figurine was either broken up into small pieces that were taken back to the village and thrown into wells, or left intact in its coffin and set down on a river to be carried downstream. In one of the fixed-date Moldavian variants, the figurine was always dug out on the Feast of the Ascension. Another variant of the ritual, attested in Fântâna Doamnei, had it buried in a field of green wheat and exhumed at Saint George's Festival (April 23), which, according to folklorist Mihai Pop, underscores Caloian's function as an agrarian fertility rite. The Caloian's departure or destruction was followed by a large and joyous feast, attended by all the villagers and known as pomana Caloianului ("alms of the Caloian"). As noted by Burada, this final part of the ceremony lasted into Friday morning, and specifically involved Lăutari performers; in some parts of the country, working the field on Caloian Tuesday afternoon was virtually a taboo. A folk dance, the Caloian hora, was sometimes performed by those attending the feast.
Drought ritual
The Caloian was also revived in rainmaking rituals that could take place later in the year, specifically "on days that follow several dry weeks, when it's sultry and the earth gets scorched by drought"; ethnologist Mihaela Bucin argues that, even as a spring ritual, the Caloian was implicitly associated with rainmaking. Progressively, the celebration was reduced in scope to a rain ritual, by confusion with other festivals, and sometimes to stop heavy rainfall as well. Ethnographer Ion Ghinoiu also proposes that the exhumation and destruction portion of some rituals may have originated with people angered by the continuation of drought: "Perhaps at an earlier stage the Caloian was only exhumed on the third day only if no rain had followed its burial [...]. These two rites were then contracted as one, and the latter became a mere sequence of the former." Contrarily, the Ciubotarus propose that breaking up the effigy was done to prevent excessive rain, and also that it represented an attenuated human sacrifice. They refer to first-hand accounts from the early 20th century which described adolescent girls, dressed up in funeral attire, being hurled into Moldavian rivers by other youth, and barely surviving the experience. A transition between the human version and the Caloian is attested in Lișna, where young villagers created human-sized dolls, or zâne, which they pretended were real girls that have to be kidnapped and buried in order to end droughts.
One informant suggested in 1949 that Caloian (known to her as Iene) was only ever performed in times of drought, usually on weekends, and with no day of rest in-between (though "sometimes, preparation are made throughout the week ahead"). In this version, the body was either directly buried near a well or allowed to float downstream on a river, with the coffin as a raft that also held up lit candles. If the latter, any other children encountered along the route were sprayed with water. This feature was reversed in other villages, where the procession itself could expect to be sprayed with water by onlookers. A variant attested in Călmățui had the figurine buried in grains of wheat or barley, whereas in Tudor Vladimirescu the ceremony closely followed regular church burials, including funeral services provided by a Romanian Orthodox priest, and a dedicated grave in the village cemetery. The custom in mixed Csángó–Romanian communities such as Oituz, which was under Catholic influence, is that the figurine be buried near a wayside cross.
With or without the burial, the rainmaking ritual closely mimicked attested practices for Easter-time (including alms which attracted the village in its entirety), with the song performed being a notable exception. It has several "relatively unitary" variants, including one cited by Burada:
Other such variants of the litany begin with a mother's search for her Caloian. Sometimes, one of the girls involved in the procession performs this role in front of the public, with the others pointing to her as they chant. As noted by Pop, they resemble in this the folk ballad Miorița, as well as Christmastime colinde—pointing to a recurring theme in "ancient Romanian poetry". As described by Ceaușescu, these are also the oldest rhymes connected to the burial ritual, and are specific in describing the figurine as a "mediator between the people and the sky above". The drought Caloian as performed around Bucharest used one such specific variant, in the southern Muntenian dialect:
The exhortation is sometimes addressed not just to Caloian, but also to the community's dead, most often ones who died recently and at a young age. In some cases, the song is extended by lamentations which depict in detail the sufferings of drought-afflicted villagers. One version from Broscăuți, in a divergent Moldavian subdialect, reads:
Cultural significance
Religious and historical connections
The Caloian is one of several burial ceremonies present in Romanian folklore—Pop draws parallels with the chasing out of the Brezaia doll at Christmas and New Years', or with the symbolic burial of a ceremonial leader at Junii Brașoveni feasts. As "one of the most archaic elements covered by the folk Calendar", Caloian itself may be deeply connected to the mythological lore of ancient cultures. Istoria literaturii romîne described Caloian as one of several songs or chants which serve to "mirror forms of [social] life that lead us back to the patriarchal village as it was at the dawn of the feudal era", and more particularly "descriptions of ceremonials or rites." Further: "the Caloian was, at least up to a point, the reification of an old concept regarding the Oriental god of nature, who dies and is resurrected."
As early as 1883, pioneer ethnologist Gheorghe Săulescu discussed similarities between Caloian and Dodola, whom he respectively knew as Calian and Papaluga. In Săulescu's reading, both were originally "national gods" of the Romanians. This approach linked Calioan with interest in Paleo-Balkan mythology. More specifically, Burada proposed that Caloian originated with the pre-Christian Dacians in Northern Dobruja (Scythia Minor). Drăgoescu argues for the same reading, reviewing the practice as "pre-Christian, agrarian", and ultimately a remnant of Dacian material culture. Contrarily, other scholars place the Caloian's roots in Roman Dacia, with imitations of the Argei cult. Beginning with the writings of Marcu Beza, researchers have focused on the death-and-rebirth component of the practice, drawing connections between the Caloian and various religions of the Ancient Near East—with specific focus on Dumuzid and Attis. Ciubotaru and Ciubotaru describe Caloian as "perhaps Thracian", and note parallels with both Attis and Dumuzid—but also with Baldr, Xipe Totec and Yarilo; the ritual in its details, they note, closely resembles one found among the Shapsugs. Writer Victor Eftimiu argues that Caloian's immediate origin is in Slavic paganism, as a localized rendition of the Morena cult; instead, folklorist Mihail Vulpescu highlights parallels with the Adonis cult. Ceaușescu proposes a generic reading of the figurine itself as an "effigy of the rain god".
There is also significant overlap between the Romanian Caloian and Germenchuk, present in Bulgarian folklore, with which southern Romanian traditions are fully contiguous. Though Gherman is attested as an alternative for Caloian in Muntenia, some other Romanian iterations of the ritual have no known correspondent in any culture. The name of (S)caloian, whether or not indicative of its origin, is probably a borrowing from Greek onomastics; comparatist Francis Lebrun noted the existence of a Khaloïánnis (Χαλοΐάννης) song in Greek folklore, proposing that it shares traits with the Romanian ritual. Linguist Petre Coman verified the existence of the word loián, used for "rain" in the dialectal Romanian of Măcin. Another linguist, George Giuglea, noted its partial synonymy with the Albanian llohë ("sleet") and the Romanian noian ("deluge"). Giuglea further argued that a once-significant spread of loián would explain (S)caloian, specifically its "idea of rain, of water".
The name referring to both figurine and ritual has also attracted attention for its hypothetical connections with the Second Bulgarian Empire, which controlled territories on both sides of the Danube. Philologist Vasile Bogrea sees Caloian as originally a likely reference to a 12th-century Bulgarian Tsar, Ioannitsa (Ioniță) Kaloyan, polemically known in Greek as Skyloioannes (which would explain contexts in which Scaloian is used). However, Bogrea cautions that the origin may prove to be the Romanian noun (s)căluș, which would link Caloian with the Călușari fraternity. Geographer Constantin Brătescu uses Caloian rituals in Northern Dobruja as evidence "that a rather wide area" of Northern Dobruja was inhabited by proto-Romanian Vlachs during Ioannitsa's empire. In 2017, ethnologists Delia-Anamaria Răchișan and Călin-Teodor Morariu indicated the origin of the name in the Slavonic kalŭ (калъ), meaning "dirt", though also noting that "some have correlated the practice with the name of Tsar Ioniță" or derived it from John the Baptist. The Slavonic derivation had also been proposed earlier by Pericle Papahagi and Ion Aurel Candrea, who suggest kale an ("yellow clay").
Spread and transformation
Săulescu was the first to record the Caloian as he witnessed it in Western Moldavia. In 1915, Burada was aware of it existing only in "certain villages" of Muntenia—split between Brăila, Buzău and Ialomița counties—and in only one locality of Western Moldavia—namely Hermeziu, Iași County. To these he added Northern Dobruja's Tulcea County—with the figurine, exclusively known here as Scaloian, being disposed off on the Danube. Caloian and its variants were only known in certain parts of Transylvania, and were never popular there, possibly owing to a very specific interdiction being enforced during the Reformation—known to have been applied against the Călușari, by 1675. Ethnologist Pamfil Bilțiu notes that an unnamed rainmaking ritual was nevertheless always practiced in that region, into the late 20th century. According to Bilțiu, it was still recognized by the old women of Leordina and other villages in Maramureș County, who recalled figurines being made out of either cloth or clay. Meanwhile, the custom had spread out to eastern peripheral areas: one 1920 report notes the Caloian being practiced by the Gagauz and Romanians of Vulcănești, in Bessarabia (now Gagauzia, Republic of Moldova).
According to Pop, the ritual had a "much larger area" than usually acknowledged, though derivatives such as Muma ploii ("Mother of Rain"), in Oltenia, and Cheloșag at Ferești in Western Moldavia. As he notes, Muma ploii also involves a burial ceremony and litanies which "seem to be only variants of the Scaloian songs." Ciubotaru and Ciubotaru refer to the same issue in noting that Caloian and its most archaic forms appear in southernmost Moldavia, whereas heterodox varieties take precedence in rural areas situated more to the north, including some areas of Bukovina. Examples include Ploița and Ploițica ("Rainy Girl") in Focuri, Păpușa ("Doll") in Horodniceni, and Mama secetei ("Mother of Drought") in Heleșteni and Santa Mare. Late adoption correlates with the usage of common female names, as is the case with Aglăița of Concești and Havârna, Catrina of Lungani, and Maricica of Vorona. Caloian-related customs appearing under various guises were also scrutinized and discussed by other folklorists. They note (as with Adrian Fochi) that Caloian should be seen as one specific incarnation of a ritual which mostly employs feminine figurines under many other names, including Caloiana, Ploaia ("The Rain"), and Maica Călătoarea ("Mother Traveler"). Specifically in Oltenia, the female figurine was asked to ensure plentiful rainfall, whereas a male one, Tatăl Soarelui ("Sun's Father"), was buried next to her to ensure that the rains would also stop. These twin burials could also garner approval from the Orthodox clergy—at Leu, the mock-funeral involved passing through the churchyard. West of Transylvania, the Romanians of Hungary had "no recollection of the Caloian". They marked a festival known as Paștele morțîlor [sic] ("Easter of the Dead"), in which they hurled eggshells into rivers, and also had Păpărugă as a localized Dodola; some fashioned Muma ploii on a separate occasion, using only clay that had been used to build a cob oven.
Pop argues that Caloian rituals were carefully maintained in certain communities by the more traditional folk, as "customs whose continued practice was of vital interest to the entire community", and "not at all child's play"; despite this, he reports that Caloian had died out by 1999, when his research was published. Similarly, Răchișan and Morariu note that, like both the Dodola and the Caloian stand as "agrarian customs practiced by children to benefit the community, and should not be mistaken for children's games." According to Ceaușescu, the practice only degenerated into "children's folklore" because of advances in agriculture, which rendered its sacred functions socially irrelevant.
In 1973, Valeriu Anania published his play Greul Pământului ("Weight of the Earth", or "Pregnancy with the Earth"), which is a mythopoeia of Caloianul as the "Vlach myth". Anania depicts Tsar Ioannitsa as a Vlach hero whose death is necessary for the survival of his kin, and whose burial under the Vlachs' main citadel consolidates their presence in history. The play also fictionalizes the origins of Io, once used as an introductory title by Romanian rulers, suggesting that it is the "seed" of Ioannitsa's name, and a recollection of his sacrifice. Anania's work was followed in 1975 by Ion Lăncrănjan's novel, Caloianul, which alludes to the clay doll as an existential metaphor—the protagonist, Alexandru Ghețea, is shown to be dying a "great" death, like a "creation of smooth clay." Such imagery was invoked by Ion Gheorghe in his 1976 poetry volume, Noimele ("The Meanings"). The ritual's name was also revived by Romanian wine producers, with Crama Oprișor marketing as Caloian its Fetească neagră, rosé and Merlot varieties.

Camouflage is the use of any combination of materials, coloration, or illumination for concealment, either by making animals or objects hard to see, or by disguising them as something else. Examples include the leopard's spotted coat, the battledress of a modern soldier, and the leaf-mimic katydid's wings. A third approach, motion dazzle, confuses the observer with a conspicuous pattern, making the object visible but momentarily harder to locate. The majority of camouflage methods aim for crypsis, often through a general resemblance to the background, high contrast disruptive coloration, eliminating shadow, and countershading. In the open ocean, where there is no background, the principal methods of camouflage are transparency, silvering, and countershading, while the ability to produce light is among other things used for counter-illumination on the undersides of cephalopods such as squid. Some animals, such as chameleons and octopuses, are capable of actively changing their skin pattern and colours, whether for camouflage or for signalling. It is possible that some plants use camouflage to evade being eaten by herbivores.
Military camouflage was spurred by the increasing range and accuracy of firearms in the 19th century. In particular the replacement of the inaccurate musket with the rifle made personal concealment in battle a survival skill. In the 20th century, military camouflage developed rapidly, especially during World War I. On land, artists such as André Mare designed camouflage schemes and observation posts disguised as trees. At sea, merchant ships and troop carriers were painted in dazzle patterns that were highly visible, but designed to confuse enemy submarines as to the target's speed, range, and heading. During and after World War II, a variety of camouflage schemes were used for aircraft and for ground vehicles in different theatres of war. The use of radar since the mid-20th century has largely made camouflage for fixed-wing military aircraft obsolete.
Non-military use of camouflage includes making cell telephone towers less obtrusive and helping hunters to approach wary game animals. Patterns derived from military camouflage are frequently used in fashion clothing, exploiting their strong designs and sometimes their symbolism. Camouflage themes recur in modern art, and both figuratively and literally in science fiction and works of literature.
History
Classical antiquity
In ancient Greece, Aristotle (384–322 BC) commented on the colour-changing abilities, both for camouflage and for signalling, of cephalopods including the octopus, in his Historia animalium:
The octopus... seeks its prey by so changing its colour as to render it like the colour of the stones adjacent to it; it does so also when alarmed.
Zoology
Camouflage has been a topic of interest and research in zoology for well over a century. According to Charles Darwin's 1859 theory of natural selection, features such as camouflage evolved by providing individual animals with a reproductive advantage, enabling them to leave more offspring, on average, than other members of the same species. In his Origin of Species, Darwin wrote:
When we see leaf-eating insects green, and bark-feeders mottled-grey; the alpine ptarmigan white in winter, the red-grouse the colour of heather, and the black-grouse that of peaty earth, we must believe that these tints are of service to these birds and insects in preserving them from danger. Grouse, if not destroyed at some period of their lives, would increase in countless numbers; they are known to suffer largely from birds of prey; and hawks are guided by eyesight to their prey, so much so, that on parts of the Continent persons are warned not to keep white pigeons, as being the most liable to destruction. Hence I can see no reason to doubt that natural selection might be most effective in giving the proper colour to each kind of grouse, and in keeping that colour, when once acquired, true and constant.
The English zoologist Edward Bagnall Poulton studied animal coloration, especially camouflage. In his 1890 book The Colours of Animals, he classified different types such as "special protective resemblance" (where an animal looks like another object), or "general aggressive resemblance" (where a predator blends in with the background, enabling it to approach prey). His experiments showed that swallow-tailed moth pupae were camouflaged to match the backgrounds on which they were reared as larvae. Poulton's "general protective resemblance" was at that time considered to be the main method of camouflage, as when Frank Evers Beddard wrote in 1892 that "tree-frequenting animals are often green in colour. Among vertebrates numerous species of parrots, iguanas, tree-frogs, and the green tree-snake are examples". Beddard did however briefly mention other methods, including the "alluring coloration" of the flower mantis and the possibility of a different mechanism in the orange tip butterfly. He wrote that "the scattered green spots upon the under surface of the wings might have been intended for a rough sketch of the small flowerets of the plant [an umbellifer], so close is their mutual resemblance." He also explained the coloration of sea fish such as the mackerel: "Among pelagic fish it is common to find the upper surface dark-coloured and the lower surface white, so that the animal is inconspicuous when seen either from above or below."
The artist Abbott Handerson Thayer formulated what is sometimes called Thayer's Law, the principle of countershading. However, he overstated the case in the 1909 book Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom, arguing that "All patterns and colors whatsoever of all animals that ever preyed or are preyed on are under certain normal circumstances obliterative" (that is, cryptic camouflage), and that "Not one 'mimicry' mark, not one 'warning color'... nor any 'sexually selected' color, exists anywhere in the world where there is not every reason to believe it the very best conceivable device for the concealment of its wearer", and using paintings such as Peacock in the Woods (1907) to reinforce his argument. Thayer was roundly mocked for these views by critics including Teddy Roosevelt.
The English zoologist Hugh Cott's 1940 book Adaptive Coloration in Animals corrected Thayer's errors, sometimes sharply: "Thus we find Thayer straining the theory to a fantastic extreme in an endeavour to make it cover almost every type of coloration in the animal kingdom." Cott built on Thayer's discoveries, developing a comprehensive view of camouflage based on "maximum disruptive contrast", countershading and hundreds of examples. The book explained how disruptive camouflage worked, using streaks of boldly contrasting colour, paradoxically making objects less visible by breaking up their outlines. While Cott was more systematic and balanced in his view than Thayer, and did include some experimental evidence on the effectiveness of camouflage, his 500-page textbook was, like Thayer's, mainly a natural history narrative which illustrated theories with examples.
Experimental evidence that camouflage helps prey avoid being detected by predators was first provided in 2016, when ground-nesting birds (plovers and coursers) were shown to survive according to how well their egg contrast matched the local environment.
Evolution
As there is a lack of evidence for camouflage in the fossil record, studying the evolution of camouflage strategies is very difficult. Furthermore, camouflage traits must be both adaptable (provide a fitness gain in a given environment) and heritable (in other words, the trait must undergo positive selection). Thus, studying the evolution of camouflage strategies requires an understanding of the genetic components and various ecological pressures that drive crypsis.
Fossil history
Camouflage is a soft-tissue feature that is rarely preserved in the fossil record, but rare fossilised skin samples from the Cretaceous period show that some marine reptiles were countershaded. The skins, pigmented with dark-coloured eumelanin, reveal that both leatherback turtles and mosasaurs had dark backs and light bellies. There is fossil evidence of camouflaged insects going back over 100 million years, for example lacewings larvae that stick debris all over their bodies much as their modern descendants do, hiding them from their prey. Dinosaurs appear to have been camouflaged, as a 120 million year old fossil of a Psittacosaurus has been preserved with countershading.
Genetics
Camouflage does not have a single genetic origin. However, studying the genetic components of camouflage in specific organisms illuminates the various ways that crypsis can evolve among lineages. Many cephalopods have the ability to actively camouflage themselves, controlling crypsis through neural activity. For example, the genome of the common cuttlefish includes 16 copies of the reflectin gene, which grants the organism remarkable control over coloration and iridescence. The reflectin gene is thought to have originated through transposition from symbiotic Aliivibrio fischeri bacteria, which provide bioluminescence to its hosts. While not all cephalopods use active camouflage, ancient cephalopods may have inherited the gene horizontally from symbiotic A. fischeri, with divergence occurred through subsequent gene duplication (such as in the case of Sepia officinalis) or gene loss (as with cephalopods with no active camouflage capabilities).[3] This is unique as an instance of camouflage arising as an instance of horizontal gene transfer from an endosymbiont. However, other methods of horizontal gene transfer are common in the evolution of camouflage strategies in other lineages. Peppered moths and walking stick insects both have camouflage-related genes that stem from transposition events.
The Agouti genes are orthologous genes involved in camouflage across many lineages. They produce yellow and red coloration (phaeomelanin), and work in competition with other genes that produce black (melanin) and brown (eumelanin) colours. In eastern deer mice, over a period of about 8000 years the single agouti gene developed 9 mutations that each made expression of yellow fur stronger under natural selection, and largely eliminated melanin-coding black fur coloration. On the other hand, all black domesticated cats have deletions of the agouti gene that prevent its expression, meaning no yellow or red color is produced. The evolution, history and widespread scope of the agouti gene shows that different organisms often rely on orthologous or even identical genes to develop a variety of camouflage strategies.
Ecology
While camouflage can increase an organism's fitness, it has genetic and energetic costs. There is a trade-off between detectability and mobility. Species camouflaged to fit a specific microhabitat are less likely to be detected when in that microhabitat, but must spend energy to reach, and sometimes to remain in, such areas. Outside the microhabitat, the organism has a higher chance of detection. Generalized camouflage allows species to avoid predation over a wide range of habitat backgrounds, but is less effective. The development of generalized or specialized camouflage strategies is highly dependent on the biotic and abiotic composition of the surrounding environment.
There are many examples of the tradeoffs between specific and general cryptic patterning. Phestilla melanocrachia, a species of nudibranch that feeds on stony coral, utilizes specific cryptic patterning in reef ecosystems. The nudibranch syphons pigments from the consumed coral into the epidermis, adopting the same shade as the consumed coral. This allows the nudibranch to change colour (mostly between black and orange) depending on the coral system that it inhabits. However, P. melanocrachia can only feed and lay eggs on the branches of host-coral, Platygyra carnosa, which limits the geographical range and efficacy in nudibranch nutritional crypsis. Furthermore, the nudibranch colour change is not immediate, and switching between coral hosts when in search for new food or shelter can be costly.
The costs associated with distractive or disruptive crypsis are more complex than the costs associated with background matching. Disruptive patterns distort the body outline, making it harder to precisely identify and locate. However, disruptive patterns result in higher predation. Disruptive patterns that specifically involve visible symmetry (such as in some butterflies) reduce survivability and increase predation. Some researchers argue that because wing-shape and color pattern are genetically linked, it is genetically costly to develop asymmetric wing colorations that would enhance the efficacy of disruptive cryptic patterning. Symmetry does not carry a high survival cost for butterflies and moths that their predators views from above on a homogeneous background, such as the bark of a tree. On the other hand, natural selection drives species with variable backgrounds and habitats to move symmetrical patterns away from the centre of the wing and body, disrupting their predators' symmetry recognition.
Principles
Camouflage can be achieved by different methods. Most of the methods help to hide against a background; but mimesis and motion dazzle protect without hiding. Methods may be applied on their own or in combination. Many mechanisms are visual, but some research has explored the use of techniques against olfactory (scent) and acoustic (sound) detection. Methods may also apply to military equipment.
Background matching
Some animals' colours and patterns match a particular natural background. This is an important component of camouflage in all environments. For instance, tree-dwelling parakeets are mainly green; woodcocks of the forest floor are brown and speckled; reedbed bitterns are streaked brown and buff; in each case the animal's coloration matches the hues of its habitat. Similarly, desert animals are almost all desert coloured in tones of sand, buff, ochre, and brownish grey, whether they are mammals like the gerbil or fennec fox, birds such as the desert lark or sandgrouse, or reptiles like the skink or horned viper. Military uniforms, too, generally resemble their backgrounds; for example khaki uniforms are a muddy or dusty colour, originally chosen for service in South Asia. Many moths show industrial melanism, including the peppered moth which has coloration that blends in with tree bark. The coloration of these insects evolved between 1860 and 1940 to match the changing colour of the tree trunks on which they rest, from pale and mottled to almost black in polluted areas. This is taken by zoologists as evidence that camouflage is influenced by natural selection, as well as demonstrating that it changes where necessary to resemble the local background.
Disruptive coloration
Disruptive patterns use strongly contrasting, non-repeating markings such as spots or stripes to break up the outlines of an animal or military vehicle, or to conceal telltale features, especially by masking the eyes, as in the common frog. Disruptive patterns may use more than one method to defeat visual systems such as edge detection. Predators like the leopard use disruptive camouflage to help them approach prey, while potential prey use it to avoid detection by predators. Disruptive patterning is common in military usage, both for uniforms and for military vehicles. Disruptive patterning, however, does not always achieve crypsis on its own, as an animal or a military target may be given away by factors like shape, shine, and shadow.
The presence of bold skin markings does not in itself prove that an animal relies on camouflage, as that depends on its behaviour. For example, although giraffes have a high contrast pattern that could be disruptive coloration, the adults are very conspicuous when in the open. Some authors have argued that adult giraffes are cryptic, since when standing among trees and bushes they are hard to see at even a few metres' distance. However, adult giraffes move about to gain the best view of an approaching predator, relying on their size and ability to defend themselves, even from lions, rather than on camouflage. A different explanation is implied by young giraffes being far more vulnerable to predation than adults. More than half of all giraffe calves die within a year, and giraffe mothers hide their newly born calves, which spend much of the time lying down in cover while their mothers are away feeding. The mothers return once a day to feed their calves with milk. Since the presence of a mother nearby does not affect survival, it is argued that these juvenile giraffes must be very well camouflaged; this is supported by coat markings being strongly inherited.
The possibility of camouflage in plants was little studied until the late 20th century. Leaf variegation with white spots may serve as camouflage in forest understory plants, where there is a dappled background; leaf mottling is correlated with closed habitats. Disruptive camouflage would have a clear evolutionary advantage in plants: they would tend to escape from being eaten by herbivores. Another possibility is that some plants have leaves differently coloured on upper and lower surfaces or on parts such as veins and stalks to make green-camouflaged insects conspicuous, and thus benefit the plants by favouring the removal of herbivores by carnivores. These hypotheses are testable.
Countershading
Countershading uses graded colour to counteract the effect of self-shadowing, creating an illusion of flatness. Self-shadowing makes an animal appear darker below than on top, grading from light to dark; countershading 'paints in' tones which are darkest on top, lightest below, making the countershaded animal nearly invisible against a suitable background. Thayer observed that "Animals are painted by Nature, darkest on those parts which tend to be most lighted by the sky's light, and vice versa". Accordingly, the principle of countershading is sometimes called Thayer's Law. Countershading is widely used by terrestrial animals, such as gazelles and grasshoppers; marine animals, such as sharks and dolphins; and birds, such as snipe and dunlin.
Countershading is less often used for military camouflage, despite Second World War experiments that showed its effectiveness. The English zoologist Hugh Cott encouraged the use of methods including countershading, but despite his authority on the subject, failed to persuade the British government. Soldiers often wrongly viewed camouflage netting as a kind of invisibility cloak, and they had to be taught to look at camouflage practically, from an enemy observer's viewpoint. At the same time in Australia, zoologist William John Dakin advised soldiers to copy animals' methods, using their instincts for wartime camouflage.
The term countershading has a second meaning unrelated to Thayer's Law. It is that the upper and undersides of animals such as sharks, and of some military aircraft, are different colours to match the different backgrounds when seen from above or from below. Here the camouflage consists of two surfaces, each with the simple function of providing concealment against a specific background, such as a bright water surface or the sky. The body of a shark or the fuselage of an aircraft is not gradated from light to dark to appear flat when seen from the side. The camouflage methods used are the matching of background colour and pattern, and disruption of outlines.
Eliminating shadow
Some animals, such as the horned lizards of North America, have evolved elaborate measures to eliminate shadow. Their bodies are flattened, with the sides thinning to an edge; the animals habitually press their bodies to the ground; and their sides are fringed with white scales which effectively hide and disrupt any remaining areas of shadow there may be under the edge of the body. The theory that the body shape of the horned lizards which live in open desert is adapted to minimise shadow is supported by the one species which lacks fringe scales, the roundtail horned lizard, which lives in rocky areas and resembles a rock. When this species is threatened, it makes itself look as much like a rock as possible by curving its back, emphasizing its three-dimensional shape. Some species of butterflies, such as the speckled wood, Pararge aegeria, minimise their shadows when perched by closing the wings over their backs, aligning their bodies with the sun, and tilting to one side towards the sun, so that the shadow becomes a thin inconspicuous line rather than a broad patch. Similarly, some ground-nesting birds, including the European nightjar, select a resting position facing the sun. Eliminating shadow was identified as a principle of military camouflage during the Second World War.
Distraction
Many prey animals have conspicuous high-contrast markings which paradoxically attract the predator's gaze. These distractive markings may serve as camouflage by distracting the predator's attention from recognising the prey as a whole, for example by keeping the predator from identifying the prey's outline. Experimentally, search times for blue tits increased when artificial prey had distractive markings.
Cryptic behaviour
Movement catches the eye of prey animals on the lookout for predators, and of predators hunting for prey. Most methods of crypsis therefore also require suitable cryptic behaviour, such as lying down and keeping still to avoid being detected, or in the case of stalking predators such as the tiger, moving with extreme stealth, both slowly and quietly, watching its prey for any sign they are aware of its presence. As an example of the combination of behaviours and other methods of crypsis involved, young giraffes seek cover, lie down, and keep still, often for hours until their mothers return; their skin pattern blends with the pattern of the vegetation, while the chosen cover and lying position together hide the animals' shadows. The flat-tail horned lizard similarly relies on a combination of methods: it is adapted to lie flat in the open desert, relying on stillness, its cryptic coloration, and concealment of its shadow to avoid being noticed by predators. In the ocean, the leafy sea dragon sways mimetically, like the seaweeds amongst which it rests, as if rippled by wind or water currents. Swaying is seen also in some insects, like Macleay's spectre stick insect, Extatosoma tiaratum. The behaviour may be motion crypsis, preventing detection, or motion masquerade, promoting misclassification (as something other than prey), or a combination of the two.
Motion camouflage
Most forms of camouflage are ineffective when the camouflaged animal or object moves, because the motion is easily seen by the observing predator, prey or enemy. However, insects such as hoverflies and dragonflies use motion camouflage: the hoverflies to approach possible mates, and the dragonflies to approach rivals when defending territories. Motion camouflage is achieved by moving so as to stay on a straight line between the target and a fixed point in the landscape; the pursuer thus appears not to move, but only to loom larger in the target's field of vision. Some insects sway while moving to appear to be blown by the wind.
The same method can be used for military purposes, for example by missiles to minimise their risk of detection by an enemy. However, missile engineers, and animals such as bats, use the method mainly for its efficiency rather than camouflage.
Mimesis
In mimesis (also called masquerade), the camouflaged object looks like something else which is of no special interest to the observer. Mimesis is common in prey animals, for example when a peppered moth caterpillar mimics a twig, or a grasshopper mimics a dry leaf. It is also found in nest structures; some eusocial wasps, such as Leipomeles dorsata, build a nest envelope in patterns that mimic the leaves surrounding the nest.
Mimesis is also employed by some predators and parasites to lure their prey. For example, a flower mantis mimics a particular kind of flower, such as an orchid. This tactic has occasionally been used in warfare, for example with heavily armed Q-ships disguised as merchant ships.
The common cuckoo, a brood parasite, provides examples of mimesis both in the adult and in the egg. The female lays her eggs in nests of other, smaller species of bird, one per nest. The female mimics a sparrowhawk. The resemblance is sufficient to make small birds take action to avoid the apparent predator. The female cuckoo then has time to lay her egg in their nest without being seen to do so. The cuckoo's egg mimics the eggs of the host species, reducing its chance of being rejected.
Motion dazzle
Most forms of camouflage are made ineffective by movement: a deer or grasshopper may be highly cryptic when motionless, but instantly seen when it moves. But one method, motion dazzle, requires rapidly moving bold patterns of contrasting stripes. Motion dazzle may degrade predators' ability to estimate the prey's speed and direction accurately, giving the prey an improved chance of escape. Motion dazzle distorts speed perception and is most effective at high speeds; stripes can also distort perception of size (and so, perceived range to the target). As of 2011, motion dazzle had been proposed for military vehicles, but never applied. Since motion dazzle patterns would make animals more difficult to locate accurately when moving, but easier to see when stationary, there would be an evolutionary trade-off between motion dazzle and crypsis.
An animal that is commonly thought to be dazzle-patterned is the zebra. The bold stripes of the zebra have been claimed to be disruptive camouflage, background-blending and countershading. After many years in which the purpose of the coloration was disputed, an experimental study by Tim Caro suggested in 2012 that the pattern reduces the attractiveness of stationary models to biting flies such as horseflies and tsetse flies. However, a simulation study by Martin How and Johannes Zanker in 2014 suggests that when moving, the stripes may confuse observers, such as mammalian predators and biting insects, by two visual illusions: the wagon-wheel effect, where the perceived motion is inverted, and the barberpole illusion, where the perceived motion is in a wrong direction.
Mechanisms
Animals can camouflage themselves by one or more principles using a variety of mechanisms. For example, some animals achieve background matching by changing their skin coloration to resemble their current background.
Changeable skin coloration
Animals such as chameleon, frog, and octopus actively change their skin patterns and colours using special chromatophore cells to resemble their current background, or, as in most chameleons, for signalling. However, Smith's dwarf chameleon does use active colour change for camouflage.
Each chromatophore contains pigment of only one colour. In fish and frogs, colour change is mediated by a type of chromatophore known as melanophores that contain dark pigment. A melanophore is star-shaped; it contains many small pigmented organelles which can be dispersed throughout the cell, or aggregated near its centre. When the pigmented organelles are dispersed, the cell makes a patch of the animal's skin appear dark; when they are aggregated, most of the cell, and the animal's skin, appears light. In frogs, the change is controlled relatively slowly, mainly by hormones. In fish, the change is controlled by the brain, which sends signals directly to the chromatophores, as well as producing hormones.
The skins of cephalopods such as the octopus contain complex units, each consisting of a chromatophore with surrounding muscle and nerve cells. The cephalopod chromatophore has all its pigment grains in a small elastic sac, which can be stretched or allowed to relax under the control of the brain to vary its opacity. By controlling chromatophores of different colours, cephalopods can rapidly change their skin patterns and colours.
On a longer timescale, animals like the Arctic hare, Arctic fox, stoat, and rock ptarmigan have snow camouflage, changing their coat colour (by moulting and growing new fur or feathers) from brown or grey in the summer to white in the winter; the Arctic fox is the only species in the dog family to do so. However, Arctic hares which live in the far north of Canada, where summer is very short, remain white year-round.
The principle of varying coloration either rapidly or with the changing seasons has military applications. Active camouflage could in theory make use of both dynamic colour change and counterillumination. Simple methods such as changing uniforms and repainting vehicles for winter have been in use since World War II. In 2011, BAE Systems announced their Adaptiv infrared camouflage technology. It uses about 1,000 hexagonal panels to cover the sides of a tank. The Peltier plate panels are heated and cooled to match either the vehicle's surroundings (crypsis), or an object such as a car (mimesis), when viewed in infrared.
Self-decoration
Some animals actively seek to hide by decorating themselves with materials such as twigs, sand, or pieces of shell from their environment, to break up their outlines, to conceal the features of their bodies, and to match their backgrounds. For example, a caddisfly larva builds a decorated case and lives almost entirely inside it; a decorator crab covers its back with seaweed, sponges, and stones. The nymph of the predatory masked bug uses its hind legs and a 'tarsal fan' to decorate its body with sand or dust. There are two layers of bristles (trichomes) over the body. On these, the nymph spreads an inner layer of fine particles and an outer layer of coarser particles. The camouflage may conceal the bug from both predators and prey.
Similar principles can be applied for military purposes, for instance when a sniper wears a ghillie suit designed to be further camouflaged by decoration with materials such as tufts of grass from the sniper's immediate environment. Such suits were used as early as 1916 when British Army snipers adopted "coats of motley hue and stripes of paint". Cott takes the example of the larva of the blotched emerald moth, which fixes a screen of fragments of leaves to its specially hooked bristles, to argue that military camouflage uses the same method, pointing out that the "device is ... essentially the same as one widely practised during the Great War for the concealment, not of caterpillars, but of caterpillar-tractors, [gun] battery positions, observation posts and so forth."
Transparency
Many marine animals that float near the surface are highly transparent, giving them almost perfect camouflage. However, transparency is difficult for bodies made of materials that have different refractive indices from seawater. Some marine animals such as jellyfish have gelatinous bodies, composed mainly of water; their thick mesogloea is acellular and highly transparent. This conveniently makes them buoyant, but it also makes them large for their muscle mass, so they cannot swim fast, making this form of camouflage a costly trade-off with mobility. Gelatinous planktonic animals are between 50 and 90 percent transparent. A transparency of 50 percent is enough to make an animal invisible to a predator such as cod at a depth of 650 metres (2,130 ft); better transparency is required for invisibility in shallower water, where the light is brighter and predators can see better. For example, a cod can see prey that are 98 percent transparent in optimal lighting in shallow water. Therefore, sufficient transparency for camouflage is more easily achieved in deeper waters.
Some tissues such as muscles can be made transparent, provided either they are very thin or organised as regular layers or fibrils that are small compared to the wavelength of visible light. A familiar example is the transparency of the lens of the vertebrate eye, which is made of the protein crystallin, and the vertebrate cornea which is made of the protein collagen. Other structures cannot be made transparent, notably the retinas or equivalent light-absorbing structures of eyes – they must absorb light to be able to function. The camera-type eye of vertebrates and cephalopods must be completely opaque. Finally, some structures are visible for a reason, such as to lure prey. For example, the nematocysts (stinging cells) of the transparent siphonophore Agalma okenii resemble small copepods. Examples of transparent marine animals include a wide variety of larvae, including radiata (coelenterates), siphonophores, salps (floating tunicates), gastropod molluscs, polychaete worms, many shrimplike crustaceans, and fish; whereas the adults of most of these are opaque and pigmented, resembling the seabed or shores where they live. Adult comb jellies and jellyfish obey the rule, often being mainly transparent. Cott suggests this follows the more general rule that animals resemble their background: in a transparent medium like seawater, that means being transparent. The small Amazon River fish Microphilypnus amazonicus and the shrimps it associates with, Pseudopalaemon gouldingi, are so transparent as to be "almost invisible"; further, these species appear to select whether to be transparent or more conventionally mottled (disruptively patterned) according to the local background in the environment.
Silvering
Where transparency cannot be achieved, it can be imitated effectively by silvering to make an animal's body highly reflective. At medium depths at sea, light comes from above, so a mirror oriented vertically makes animals such as fish invisible from the side. Most fish in the upper ocean such as sardine and herring are camouflaged by silvering.
The marine hatchetfish is extremely flattened laterally, leaving the body just millimetres thick, and the body is so silvery as to resemble aluminium foil. The mirrors consist of microscopic structures similar to those used to provide structural coloration: stacks of between 5 and 10 crystals of guanine spaced about 1⁄4 of a wavelength apart to interfere constructively and achieve nearly 100 per cent reflection. In the deep waters that the hatchetfish lives in, only blue light with a wavelength of 500 nanometres percolates down and needs to be reflected, so mirrors 125 nanometres apart provide good camouflage.
In fish such as the herring which live in shallower water, the mirrors must reflect a mixture of wavelengths, and the fish accordingly has crystal stacks with a range of different spacings. A further complication for fish with bodies that are rounded in cross-section is that the mirrors would be ineffective if laid flat on the skin, as they would fail to reflect horizontally. The overall mirror effect is achieved with many small reflectors, all oriented vertically. Silvering is found in other marine animals as well as fish. The cephalopods, including squid, octopus and cuttlefish, have multilayer mirrors made of protein rather than guanine.
Counter-illumination
Counter-illumination means producing light to match a background that is brighter than an animal's body or military vehicle; it is a form of active camouflage. It is notably used by some species of squid, such as the firefly squid and the midwater squid. The latter has light-producing organs (photophores) scattered all over its underside; these create a sparkling glow that prevents the animal from appearing as a dark shape when seen from below. Counterillumination camouflage is the likely function of the bioluminescence of many marine organisms, though light is also produced to attract or to detect prey and for signalling.
Counterillumination has rarely been used for military purposes. "Diffused lighting camouflage" was trialled by Canada's National Research Council during the Second World War. It involved projecting light on to the sides of ships to match the faint glow of the night sky, requiring awkward external platforms to support the lamps. The Canadian concept was refined in the American Yehudi lights project, and trialled in aircraft including B-24 Liberators and naval Avengers. The planes were fitted with forward-pointing lamps automatically adjusted to match the brightness of the night sky. This enabled them to approach much closer to a target – within 3,000 yards (2,700 m) – before being seen. Counterillumination was made obsolete by radar, and neither diffused lighting camouflage nor Yehudi lights entered active service.
Ultra-blackness
Some deep sea fishes have very black skin, reflecting under 0.5% of ambient light. This can prevent detection by predators or prey fish which use bioluminescence for illumination. Oneirodes had a particularly black skin which reflected only 0.044% of 480 nm wavelength light. The ultra-blackness is achieved with a thin but continuous layer of particles in the dermis, melanosomes. These particles both absorb most of the light, and are sized and shaped so as to scatter rather than reflect most of the rest. Modelling suggests that this camouflage should reduce the distance at which such a fish can be seen by a factor of 6 compared to a fish with a nominal 2% reflectance. Species with this adaptation are widely dispersed in various orders of the phylogenetic tree of bony fishes (Actinopterygii), implying that natural selection has driven the convergent evolution of ultra-blackness camouflage independently many times.
Applications
Military
Before 1800
Ship camouflage was occasionally used in ancient times. Philostratus (c. 172–250 AD) wrote in his Imagines that Mediterranean pirate ships could be painted blue-gray for concealment. Vegetius (c. 360–400 AD) says that "Venetian blue" (sea green) was used in the Gallic Wars, when Julius Caesar sent his speculatoria navigia (reconnaissance boats) to gather intelligence along the coast of Britain; the ships were painted entirely in bluish-green wax, with sails, ropes and crew the same colour. There is little evidence of military use of camouflage on land before 1800, but two unusual ceramics show men in Peru's Mochica culture from before 500 AD, hunting birds with blowpipes which are fitted with a kind of shield near the mouth, perhaps to conceal the hunters' hands and faces. Another early source is a 15th-century French manuscript, The Hunting Book of Gaston Phebus, showing a horse pulling a cart which contains a hunter armed with a crossbow under a cover of branches, perhaps serving as a hide for shooting game. Jamaican Maroons are said to have used plant materials as camouflage in the First Maroon War (c. 1655–1740).
19th-century origins
The development of military camouflage was driven by the increasing range and accuracy of infantry firearms in the 19th century. In particular the replacement of the inaccurate musket with weapons such as the Baker rifle made personal concealment in battle essential. Two Napoleonic era skirmishing units of the British Army, the 60th Foot and 95th Rifles, were the first to adopt camouflage in the form of a rifle green jacket, while other British troops largely continued to wear red coats. A contemporary study in 1800 by the British artist and army officer Charles Hamilton Smith provided evidence that grey uniforms were less visible than green ones at a range of 150 yards.
During the American Civil War, rifle units such as the Union army's 1st United States Sharpshooters wore green jackets while most Union units wore more conspicuous blue uniforms. The first British military unit to adopt khaki uniforms was the Bengal Army's Corps of Guides, when in 1848 Sir Harry Lumsden and his second in command William Stephen Raikes Hodson introduced a "drab" uniform while the unit was stationed at Peshawar. Hodson wrote that it would be more appropriate for the hot climate, and help make his troops "invisible in a land of dust". Later they improvised by dyeing cloth locally. Other units in British India soon adopted the khaki uniform, and by 1896 khaki drill uniform was used everywhere outside Europe; by the Second Boer War six years later it was used throughout the British Army.
During the late 19th century camouflage was applied to British coastal fortifications. The fortifications around Plymouth, England were painted in the late 1880s in "irregular patches of red, brown, yellow and green." From 1891 onwards British coastal artillery was permitted to be painted in suitable colours "to harmonise with the surroundings" and by 1904 it was standard practice that artillery and mountings should be painted with "large irregular patches of different colours selected to suit local conditions."
In the Imperial German Army, feldgrau was introduced in 1907 in place of the 18th- and 19th century-era use of bright colours to distinguish German troops from enemy soldiers. The German army's feldgrau uniforms were generally grey but with various hues of green depending on the unit. In 1908, the Austro-Hungarian Army adopted a plain light blue uniform in place of their previous dark blue uniforms; by 1916 they had switched to feldgrau as well.
First World War
In the First World War, the French army formed a camouflage corps, led by Lucien-Victor Guirand de Scévola, employing artists known as camoufleurs to create schemes such as tree observation posts and covers for guns. Other armies soon followed them. The term camouflage probably comes from camoufler, a Parisian slang term meaning to disguise, and may have been influenced by camouflet, a French term meaning smoke blown in someone's face. The English zoologist John Graham Kerr, artist Solomon J. Solomon and the American artist Abbott Thayer led attempts to introduce scientific principles of countershading and disruptive patterning into military camouflage, with limited success. In early 1916 the Royal Naval Air Service began to create dummy air fields to draw the attention of enemy planes to empty land. They created decoy homes and lined fake runways with flares, which were meant to help protect real towns from night raids. This strategy was not common practice and did not succeed at first, but in 1918 it caught the Germans off guard multiple times.
Ship camouflage was introduced in the early 20th century as the range of naval guns increased, with ships painted grey all over. In April 1917, when German U-boats were sinking large numbers of British ships with torpedoes, the marine artist Norman Wilkinson devised dazzle camouflage, which paradoxically made ships more visible but harder to target. In Wilkinson's own words, dazzle was designed "not for low visibility, but in such a way as to break up her form and thus confuse a submarine officer as to the course on which she was heading".
Second World War
In the Second World War, the zoologist Hugh Cott, a protégé of Kerr, worked to persuade the British army to use more effective camouflage methods, including countershading, but, like Kerr and Thayer in the First World War, with limited success. For example, he painted two rail-mounted coastal guns, one in conventional style, one countershaded. In aerial photographs, the countershaded gun was essentially invisible. The power of aerial observation and attack led every warring nation to camouflage targets of all types. The Soviet Union's Red Army created the comprehensive doctrine of Maskirovka for military deception, including the use of camouflage. For example, during the Battle of Kursk, General Katukov, the commander of the Soviet 1st Tank Army, remarked that the enemy "did not suspect that our well-camouflaged tanks were waiting for him. As we later learned from prisoners, we had managed to move our tanks forward unnoticed". The tanks were concealed in previously prepared defensive emplacements, with only their turrets above ground level. In the air, Second World War fighters were often painted in ground colours above and sky colours below, attempting two different camouflage schemes for observers above and below. Bombers and night fighters were often black, while maritime reconnaissance planes were usually white, to avoid appearing as dark shapes against the sky. For ships, dazzle camouflage was mainly replaced with plain grey in the Second World War, though experimentation with colour schemes continued.
As in the First World War, artists were pressed into service; for example, the surrealist painter Roland Penrose became a lecturer at the newly founded Camouflage Development and Training Centre at Farnham Castle, writing the practical Home Guard Manual of Camouflage. The film-maker Geoffrey Barkas ran the Middle East Command Camouflage Directorate during the 1941–1942 war in the Western Desert, including the successful deception of Operation Bertram. Hugh Cott was chief instructor; the artist camouflage officers, who called themselves camoufleurs, included Steven Sykes and Tony Ayrton. In Australia, artists were also prominent in the Sydney Camouflage Group, formed under the chairmanship of Professor William John Dakin, a zoologist from Sydney University. Max Dupain, Sydney Ure Smith, and William Dobell were among the members of the group, which worked at Bankstown Airport, RAAF Base Richmond and Garden Island Dockyard. In the United States, artists like John Vassos took a certificate course in military and industrial camouflage at the American School of Design with Baron Nicholas Cerkasoff, and went on to create camouflage for the Air Force.
After 1945
Camouflage has been used to protect military equipment such as vehicles, guns, ships, aircraft and buildings as well as individual soldiers and their positions.
Vehicle camouflage methods begin with paint, which offers at best only limited effectiveness. Other methods for stationary land vehicles include covering with improvised materials such as blankets and vegetation, and erecting nets, screens and soft covers which may suitably reflect, scatter or absorb near infrared and radar waves. Some military textiles and vehicle camouflage paints also reflect infrared to help provide concealment from night vision devices.
After the Second World War, radar made camouflage generally less effective, though coastal boats are sometimes painted like land vehicles. Aircraft camouflage too came to be seen as less important because of radar, and aircraft of different air forces, such as the Royal Air Force's Lightning, were often uncamouflaged.
Many camouflaged textile patterns have been developed to suit the need to match combat clothing to different kinds of terrain (such as woodland, snow, and desert). The design of a pattern effective in all terrains has proved elusive. The American Universal Camouflage Pattern of 2004 attempted to suit all environments, but was withdrawn after a few years of service. Terrain-specific patterns have sometimes been developed but are ineffective in other terrains. The problem of making a pattern that works at different ranges has been solved with multiscale designs, often with a pixellated appearance and designed digitally, that provide a fractal-like range of patch sizes so they appear disruptively coloured both at close range and at a distance. The first genuinely digital camouflage pattern was the Canadian Disruptive Pattern (CADPAT), issued to the army in 2002, soon followed by the American Marine pattern (MARPAT). A pixellated appearance is not essential for this effect, though it is simpler to design and to print.
Hunting
Hunters of game have long made use of camouflage in the form of materials such as animal skins, mud, foliage, and green or brown clothing to enable them to approach wary game animals. Field sports such as driven grouse shooting conceal hunters in hides (also called blinds or shooting butts). Modern hunting clothing makes use of fabrics that provide a disruptive camouflage pattern; for example, in 1986 the hunter Bill Jordan created cryptic clothing for hunters, printed with images of specific kinds of vegetation such as grass and branches.
Civil structures
Camouflage is occasionally used to make built structures less conspicuous: for example, in South Africa, towers carrying cell telephone antennae are sometimes camouflaged as tall trees with plastic branches, in response to "resistance from the community". Since this method is costly (a figure of three times the normal cost is mentioned), alternative forms of camouflage can include using neutral colours or familiar shapes such as cylinders and flagpoles. Conspicuousness can also be reduced by siting masts near, or on, other structures.
Automotive manufacturers often use patterns to disguise upcoming products. This camouflage is designed to obfuscate the vehicle's visual lines, and is used along with padding, covers, and decals. The patterns' purpose is to prevent visual observation (and to a lesser degree photography), that would subsequently enable reproduction of the vehicle's form factors.
Fashion, art and society
Military camouflage patterns influenced fashion and art from the time of the First World War onwards. Gertrude Stein recalled the cubist artist Pablo Picasso's reaction in around 1915:
I very well remember at the beginning of the war being with Picasso on the boulevard Raspail when the first camouflaged truck passed. It was at night, we had heard of camouflage but we had not seen it and Picasso amazed looked at it and then cried out, yes it is we who made it, that is cubism.
In 1919, the attendants of a "dazzle ball", hosted by the Chelsea Arts Club, wore dazzle-patterned black and white clothing. The ball influenced fashion and art via postcards and magazine articles. The Illustrated London News announced:
The scheme of decoration for the great fancy dress ball given by the Chelsea Arts Club at the Albert Hall, the other day, was based on the principles of "Dazzle", the method of "camouflage" used during the war in the painting of ships ... The total effect was brilliant and fantastic.
More recently, fashion designers have often used camouflage fabric for its striking designs, its "patterned disorder" and its symbolism. Camouflage clothing can be worn largely for its symbolic significance rather than for fashion, as when, during the late 1960s and early 1970s in the United States, anti-war protestors often ironically wore military clothing during demonstrations against the American involvement in the Vietnam War. Clothing with a camouflage design is illegal for civilians in some countries, including Barbados, Jamaica and Saint Lucia.
Modern artists such as Ian Hamilton Finlay have used camouflage to reflect on war. His 1973 screenprint of a tank camouflaged in a leaf pattern, Arcadia, is described by the Tate as drawing "an ironic parallel between this idea of a natural paradise and the camouflage patterns on a tank". The title refers to the Utopian Arcadia of poetry and art, and the memento mori Latin phrase Et in Arcadia ego which recurs in Hamilton Finlay's work. In science fiction, Camouflage is a novel about shapeshifting alien beings by Joe Haldeman. The word is used more figuratively in works of literature such as Thaisa Frank's collection of stories of love and loss, A Brief History of Camouflage. In 1986, Andy Warhol began a series of monumental camouflage paintings, which helped to transform camouflage into a popular print pattern. A year later, in 1987, New York designer Stephen Sprouse used Warhol's camouflage prints as the basis for his Autumn Winter 1987 collection.

A campfire is a fire at a campsite that provides light, warmth, and heat for cooking. It can also serve as a beacon and an insect and predator deterrent. Established campgrounds often provide a stone or steel fire ring for safety. Campfires are a popular feature of camping. At summer camps, the word campfire often refers to an event (ceremony, get together, etc.) at which there is a fire. Some camps refer to the fire itself as a campfire.
History
First campfire
An analysis of burned antelope bones from caves in Swartkrans, South Africa, confirms that Australopithecus robustus and/or Homo erectus built campfires roughly 1.6 million years ago. Evidence within Wonderwerk Cave, at the edge of the Kalahari Desert, has been called the oldest known controlled fire. Microscopic analysis of plant ash and charred bone fragments suggests that materials in the cave were not heated above about 1,300 °F (704 °C). This is consistent with preliminary findings that the fires burned grasses, brush, and leaves. Such fuel would produce weak flames. The data suggests humans were cooking prey by campfire as far back as the first appearance of Homo erectus 1.9 million years ago.
Safety
Finding a site
Ideally, campfires should be made in a fire ring. If a fire ring is not available, a temporary fire site may be constructed. Bare rock or unvegetated ground is ideal for a fire site. Alternatively, turf may be cut away to form a bare area and carefully replaced after the fire has cooled to minimize damage. Another way is to cover the ground with sand, or other soil mostly free of flammable organic material, to a depth of a few inches. A ring of rocks is sometimes constructed around a fire. Fire rings, however, do not fully protect material on the ground from catching fire. Flying embers are still a threat, and the fire ring may become hot enough to ignite material in contact with it, or the heat the water to a vapor thereby cracking the rocks.
Safety measures
Campfires can spark wildfires. As such, it is important for the fire builder to take multiple safety precautions, including:
Avoiding building campfires under hanging branches or over steep slopes, and clear a ten-foot diameter circle around the fire of all flammable debris.
Having enough water nearby and a shovel to smother an out-of-control fire with dirt.
Minimizing the size of the fire to prevent problems from occurring.
Never leaving a campfire unattended.
When extinguishing a campfire, using plenty of water or dirt, then stirring the mixture and add more water, then check that there are no burning embers left whatsoever.
Never bury hot coals, as they can continue to burn and cause root fires or wildfires. Be aware of roots if digging a hole for your fire.
Making sure the fire pit is large enough for the campfire and there are no combustibles near the campfire, and avoiding the construction of the campfire on a windy day.
Types of fuel
There are three types of material involved in building a fire without manufactured fuels or modern conveniences such as lighters:
Tinder lights easily and is used to start an enduring campfire. It is anything that can be lit with a spark and is usually classified as being thinner than a human's pinky finger. The tinder of choice before matches and lighters was amadou next to flint and steel. A few decent natural tinders are cotton, birch bark, cedar bark, and fatwood, where available; followed by dead, dry pine needles or grass; a more comprehensive list is given in the article on tinder. Although not natural, steel wool makes excellent tinder and can be started with steel and flint, or a 9 volt battery without difficulty.
Kindling wood is an arbitrary classification including anything bigger than tinder but smaller than fuel wood. In fact, there are gradations of kindling, from sticks thinner than a finger to those as thick as a wrist. A quantity of kindling sufficient to fill a hat may be enough, but more is better. A faggot is a related term indicating a bundle of small branches used to feed a small fire or continue developing a bigger fire out of a small one.
Fuel wood can be different types of timber. Timber ranges from small logs two or three inches (76 mm) across to larger logs that can burn for hours. It is typically difficult to gather without a hatchet or other cutting tool. In heavily used campsites, fuel wood can be hard to find, so it may have to purchased at a nearby store or be brought from home. However, untreated wood should not be transported due to the probability that invasive species of bugs will be transported with it. Heat-treated wood such as kiln-dried lumber is safe to transport. In the United States, areas that allow camping, like state parks and national parks, often let campers collect firewood lying on the ground. Some parks do not do this for various reasons, e.g. if they have erosion problems from campgrounds near dunes. Parks almost always forbid cutting living trees, and may also prohibit collecting dead parts of standing trees.
In most realistic cases nowadays, non-natural additions to the fuels mentioned above will be used. Often, charcoal lighters like hexamine fuel tablets or ethyl alcohol will be used to start the fire, as well as various types of scrap paper. With the proliferation of packaged food, it is quite likely that plastics will be incinerated as well, a practice that not only produces toxic fumes but will also leave polluted ashes behind because of incomplete combustion at too-low open fire temperatures.
Construction styles
There are a variety of designs to choose from in building a campfire. A functional design is important in the early stages of a fire. Most of them make no mention of fuelwood—in most designs, fuelwood is never placed on a fire until the kindling is burning strongly.
Teepee
The tipi (or teepee) fire-build takes some patience to construct. First, the tinder is piled up in a compact heap. The smaller kindling is arranged around it, like the poles of a tipi. For added strength, it may be possible to lash some of the sticks together. A tripod lashing is quite difficult to execute with small sticks, so a clove hitch should suffice. (Synthetic rope should be avoided since it produces pollutants when it burns.) Then the larger kindling is arranged above the smaller kindling, taking care not to collapse the tipi. A separate tipi as a shell around the first one may work better. Tipi fires are excellent for producing heat to keep people warm. The gases from the bottom quickly come to the top as you add more sticks.
One downside to a Tipi fire is that when it burns, the logs become unstable and can fall over. This is especially concerning with a large fire.
Log cabin
A log cabin fire-build likewise begins with a tinder pile. The kindling is then stacked around it, as in the construction of a log cabin. The first two kindling sticks are laid parallel to each other, on opposite sides of the tinder pile. The second pair is laid on top of the first, at right angles to it, and also on opposite sides of the tinder. More kindling is added in the same manner. The smallest kindling is placed over the top of the assembly. Of all the fire-builds, the log cabin is the least vulnerable to premature collapse, but it is also inefficient because it makes the worst use of convection to ignite progressively larger pieces of fuel. However, these qualities make the log cabin an ideal cooking fire as it burns for a long period of time and can support cookware.
A variation on the log cabin starts with two pieces of fuelwood with a pile of tinder between them, and small kindling laid over the tops of the logs, above the tinder. The tinder is lit, and the kindling is allowed to catch fire. When it is burning briskly, it is broken and pushed down into the consumed tinder, and the larger kindling is placed over the top of the logs. When that is burning well, it is also pushed down. Eventually, a pile of kindling burns between two pieces of fuelwood, and soon the logs catch fire from it.
Another variation is called the funeral pyre method because it is used for building funeral pyres. Its main difference from the standard log cabin is that it starts with thin pieces and moves up to thick pieces. If built on a large scale, this type of fire-build collapses in a controlled manner without restricting the airflow.
Hybrid
A hybrid fire combines the elements of both the tipi and the log cabin creating an easily lit yet stable fire structure. The hybrid is made by first erecting a small tipi and then proceeding to construct a log cabin around it. This fire structure combines benefits of both fire types: the tipi allows the fire to ignite easily and the log cabin sustains the fire for a long time.
Cross-fire
A cross-fire is built by positioning two pieces of wood with the tinder in between. Once the fire is burning well, additional pieces of wood are placed on top in layers that alternate directions. This type of fire creates coals suitable for cooking.
Lean-to
A lean-to fire-build starts with the same pile of tinder as the tipi fire-build. Then, a long, thick piece of kindling is driven into the ground at an angle, so that it overhangs the tinder pile. The smaller pieces of kindling are leaned against the big stick so that the tinder is enclosed between them.
In an alternative method, a large piece of fuelwood or log can be placed on the ground next to the tinder pile. Then kindling is placed with one end propped up by the larger piece of fuelwood, and the other resting on the ground so that the kindling is leaning over the tinder pile. This method is useful in very high winds, as the piece of fuel wood acts as a windbreak.
Rakovalkea
The traditional Finnish rakovalkea (lit. 'slit bonfire'), or nying in Scandinavian languages, also called by English terms long log fire or gap fire, is constructed by placing one long and thick piece of fuelwood (log) atop another, parallel, and bolstering them in place with four sturdy posts driven into the ground. Traditionally, whole un-split tree trunks provide the fuelwood. Kindling and tinder are placed between the logs in sufficient quantity (while avoiding the very ends) to raise the upper log and allow ventilation. The tinder is always lit at the center so the bolstering posts near the ends do not burn prematurely.
The rakovalkea has two significant features. First, it burns slowly but steadily when lit; it does not require arduous maintenance, but burns for a very long time. A well constructed rakovalkea of two thick logs of two meters in length can warm two lean-to shelters for a whole sleeping shift. The construction causes the logs themselves to protect the fire from the wind. Thus, exposure to smoke is unlikely for the sleepers; nevertheless someone should always watch in case of an emergency. Second, it can be easily scaled to larger sizes (for a feast) limited only by the length of available tree trunks. The arrangement is also useful as beacon fire, i.e. a temporary light signal for ships far in the sea.
Swedish torch
The Swedish torch (Schwedenfackel or Schwedenfeuer) is also known by other names, including Swedish (log) candle, and Swedish log stove.
This fire is unique because it uses only one piece of fairly-sized wood as its fuel. The log is partially cut (though some variants involve completely splitting it) and then set upright. Ideally, the log should be cut evenly and placed on a level surface for stability. Tinder and kindling are added to the preformed chamber created by the initial cuts. Eventually, the fire becomes self-feeding. The flat, circular top provides a surface for placing a kettle or pan for cooking, boiling liquids, and more. In some instances, the elevated position of the fire can serve as a better beacon than a typical ground-based campfire.
Keyhole fire
A keyhole fire is made in a keyhole-shaped fire ring, and is used in cooking. The large round area is used to build a fire to create coals. As coals develop, they are scraped into the rectangular area used for cooking.
Top lighter
A "top lighter" fire is built similar to a log cabin or pyre, but instead of the tinder and kindling being placed inside the cabin, it is placed in a tipi on top. The small tipi is lighted on top, and the coals eventually fall down into the log cabin. Outdoor youth organizations often build these fires for "council fires" or ceremonial fires. They burn predictably, and with some practice a builder can estimate how long they will last. They also do not throw off much heat, which isn't needed for a ceremonial fire. The fire burns from the top down, with the layer of hot coals and burning stubs igniting the next layer down.
Another variation to the top lighter, log cabin, or pyre is known by several names, most notably the pyramid, self-feeding, and upside-down method. The reasoning for this method are twofold. First, the layers of fuelwood take in the heat from the initial tinder/kindling, therefore, it is not lost to the surrounding ground. In effect, the fire is "off the ground", and burns its way down through its course. And secondly, this fire type requires minimal labor, thereby making it ideal as a fire of choice before bedding down for the evening without having to get up periodically to add fuelwood and/or stoke the fire to keep it going. Start by adding the largest fuelwood in a parallel "layer", then continue to add increasingly smaller and smaller fuelwood layers perpendicularly to the last layer. Once enough wood is piled, there should be a decent "platform" to make the tipi [tinder/kindling] to initiate the fire.
Dakota smokeless pit fire
A Dakota smokeless pit fire is a tactical fire used by the United States military as the flame produces a low light signature, reduced smoke, and is easier to ignite under strong wind conditions. Two small holes are dug in the ground: one vertical for the firewood and the other slanted to the bottom of the first hole to provide a draft of air for nearly complete combustion. Optional are flat stones to partially cover the first hole and provide support for cookery, and a tree over the pits to disperse the smoke.
Star Fire
A Star Fire, or Indian Fire, is the fire design often depicted as the campfire of the old West. Typically, three to six logs are laid out like the spokes of a wheel (star-shaped). The fire is started at the "hub" and logs are pushed towards the center as the flames consume them.
Ignition
Once the fire is built, the tinder is lighted, using one of several methods
smoldering black carbon powder produced by friction between a stick, or bow drill, or pump drill and a hole or crack on dry wood,
a magnifying glass focusing sunlight,
smoldering material produced by a fire piston,
smoldering black carbon powder produced by a bamboo fire saw
smoldering material produced by a fire roll (small amount of cotton mixed with ash or iron rust, rolled vigorously between two flat stones or planks, until it starts smoking),
smoldering material produced by a piece of flint or ferro-rod struck against steel over amadou or other initial tinder, or
an ignition device, such as a match or a lighter.
A reasonably skilful fire-builder using reasonably good material only needs one match. The tinder burns brightly, but reduced to glowing embers within half a minute. If the kindling does not catch fire, the fire-builder must gather more tinder, determine what went wrong and try to fix it.
One of five problems can prevent a fire from lighting properly: wet wood, wet weather, too little tinder, too much wind, or a lack of oxygen. Rain will douse a fire, but a combination of wind and fog also has a stifling effect. Metal fire rings generally do a good job of keeping out wind, but some of them are so high as to impede the circulation of oxygen in a small fire. To make matters worse, these tall fire rings also make it very difficult to blow on the fire properly.
A small, enclosed fire that has slowed down may require vigorous blowing to get it going again, but excess blowing can extinguish a fire. Most large fires easily create their own circulation, even in unfavourable conditions, but the variant log-cabin fire-build suffers from a chronic lack of air so long as the initial structure is maintained.
Once large kindling is burning, all kindling is placed in the fire, then the fuel wood is placed on top of it (unless, as in the rakovalkea fire-build, it is already there).
Activities
Campfires have been used for cooking since time immemorial. Possibly the simplest method of cooking over a campfire and one of the most common is to roast food on long skewers that can be held above red glowing embers, or on the side near the flames (not over flames in order to avoid soot contamination and burnt food). This is a popular technique for cooking hot dogs or toasting marshmallows for making s'mores. This type of cooking over the fire typically consists of comfort foods that are easy to prepare. There is also no clean up involved unlike an actual kitchen. Another technique is to use pie irons—small iron molds with long handles. Campers put slices of bread with some kind of filling into the molds and put them over hot coals to cook. Campers sometimes use elaborate grills, cast iron pots, and fire irons to cook. Often, however, they use portable stoves for cooking instead of campfires.
Other practical, though not commonly needed, applications for campfires include drying wet clothing, alleviating hypothermia, and distress signaling. Most campfires, though, are exclusively for recreation, often as a venue for conversation, storytelling, or song. Another traditional campfire activity involves impaling marshmallows on sticks or uncoiled wire coat hangers, and roasting them over the fire. Roasted marshmallows may also be used for s'mores.
The Wayanad Literature Festival, India's largest rurally held literature festival is known for their campfire sessions where renowned books are read by authors.
Dangers
Beside the danger of people receiving burns from the fire or embers, campfires may spread into a larger fire. A campfire may burn out of control in two basic ways: on the ground or in the trees. Dead leaves or pine needles on the ground may ignite from direct contact with burning wood, or from thermal radiation. If a root, particularly a dead one, is exposed to fire, it may smoulder underground and ignite the parent tree long after the original fire is doused and the campers have left the area. Alternatively, airborne embers (or their smaller kin, sparks) may ignite dead material in overhanging branches. This latter threat is less likely, but a fire in a branch is extremely difficult to put out without firefighting equipment, and may spread more quickly than a ground fire.
Embers may simply fall off logs and float away in the air, or exploding pockets of sap may eject them at high speed. With these dangers in mind, some places prohibit all open fires, particularly at times prone to wildfires.
Many public camping areas prohibit campfires. Public areas with large tracts of woodland usually have signs that indicate the fire danger level, which usually depends on recent rain and the amount of deadfall or dry debris. Even in safer times, it is common to require registration and permits to build a campfire. Such areas are often kept under observation by rangers, who will dispatch someone to investigate any unidentified plume of smoke.
Extinguishing the fire
Leaving a fire unattended can be dangerous. Any number of accidents might occur in the absence of people, leading to property damage, personal injury or possibly a wildfire. Ash is a good insulator, so embers left overnight only lose a fraction of their heat. It is often possible to restart the new day's fire using the embers.
To properly cool a fire, water is splashed on all embers, including places that are not glowing red. Splashing the water is both more effective and efficient in extinguishing the fire. The water boils violently and carries ash in the air with it, dirtying anything nearby but not posing a safety hazard. Water is continuously poured until the hissing stops, then the ashes are stirred to ensure that water reaches the entire fire, and more water is added if necessary. When the fire is fully extinguished, the ashes are cool to the touch.
If water is scarce, sand is used to deprive the fire of oxygen. Sand works well, but is less effective than water at absorbing heat. Once the fire is covered thoroughly with sand, water is then added over the fire.
When winter or "snow" camping with an inch or more of snow on the ground, neither of the above protocols are necessary—simply douse visible flames before leaving. In lightly used wilderness areas, the area around the campfire is cleaned up to make it look untouched after the fire is extinguished.
Campfire ashes are sometimes used in ceremonies like the Scouting campfire ash ceremony.
Gallery

Camping is a form of outdoor recreation or outdoor education involving overnight stays with a basic temporary shelter such as a tent. Camping can also include a recreational vehicle, sheltered cabins, a permanent tent, a shelter such as a bivy or tarp, hammock, or no shelter at all. Typically, participants leave developed areas to spend time outdoors, in pursuit of activities providing them enjoyment or in a form of educational experience. Spending the night away from home distinguishes camping from day-tripping, picnicking, and other outdoor activities.
Camping as a recreational activity became popular among elites in the early 20th century. With time, it grew in popularity among other socioeconomic classes. Modern campers frequent publicly owned natural resources such as national and state parks, wilderness areas, and commercial campgrounds. In a few countries, including Sweden and Scotland, public camping is legal on privately held land as well. Camping is a key part of many youth organizations around the world, such as Scouting, which use it to teach both self-reliance and teamwork. School camping trips also have numerous benefits and can play an essential role in the personal growth and development of students.
Definition
The Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary defines camping as:
The act of staying and sleeping in an outside area for one or more days and nights, usually in a tent.The Britannica Dictionary defines camping as:
The activity of sleeping outdoors in a tent usually for enjoyment.
Camping describes a range of activities and approaches to outdoor accommodation. Survivalist and wild campers typically set off with as little as possible to get by. Other campers might use specialized camping gear designed to provide comfort, including their own power and heat sources as well as camping furniture. Camping may be combined with hiking, as in backpacking, and is often enjoyed in conjunction with other outdoor activities such as canoeing, kayaking, climbing, fishing, and hunting. Fastpacking involves both running and camping.
There is no universally held definition of what is and what is not camping. Just as with motels, which serve both recreational and business guests, the same campground may serve recreational campers, school field trips, migrant workers, and the homeless at the same time. Fundamentally, it reflects a combination of intent and the nature of the activities involved. A children's summer camp with dining hall meals and bunkhouse accommodations may have "camp" in its name but fails to reflect the spirit and form of "camping" as it is broadly understood. Similarly, a homeless person's lifestyle may involve many common camping activities, such as sleeping out and preparing meals over a fire but fails to reflect the elective nature and pursuit of spirit rejuvenation that are an integral aspect of camping.
History
The history of recreational camping is often traced back to Thomas Hiram Holding, a British traveling tailor, but it was first popularised in the UK on the River Thames. By the 1880s, large numbers of visitors took part in the pastime, which was connected to the late Victorian craze for pleasure boating. Although Thomas Hiram Holding is often seen as the father of modern camping in the UK, he was responsible for popularising a different type of camping in the early twentieth century. He experienced the activity in his youth when he spent much time traveling across the American prairies with his parents. Later he embarked on a cycling and camping tour with some friends across Ireland. His book on his Ireland experience, Cycle and Camp in Connemara led to the formation of the first camping group in 1901, the Association of Cycle Campers, later to become the Camping and Caravanning Club. He wrote The Campers Handbook in 1908, so that he could share his enthusiasm for the great outdoors with the world.
Possibly the first commercial camping ground in the world was Cunningham's camp, near Douglas, Isle of Man, which opened in 1894. In 1906, the Association of Cycle Campers opened its first camping site in Weybridge. By that time, the organization had several hundred members. In 1910 the Association was merged into the National Camping Club. Although the First World War was responsible for a certain hiatus in camping activity, the association received a new lease of life after the war when Sir Robert Baden-Powell (founder of the Boy Scouts movement) became its president in 1919.
In the US, camping may be traced to William Henry Harrison Murray's 1869 publication of Camp-Life in the Adirondacks, resulting in a flood of visitors to the Adirondacks that summer.
During the early twentieth century, the popularity of camping in the United States grew as a result of the publicity created by The Vagabonds: Henry Ford, Thomas Edison, John Burroughs, and Harvey S. Firestone. This group of famous American businessmen, inventors, and authors traveled for ten years to different states, and the press highly documented their trips from across the country. Oftentimes, "...these rough and tumble pioneers would drive toward the Adirondacks and essentially live off the land, camping at farms and buying food along the way just like ordinary Americans out for a holiday on the road."
The International Federation of Camping Clubs (Fédération Internationale de Camping et de Caravanning) was founded in 1932, and national clubs from many countries affiliated with it. By the 1960s, camping had become an established family holiday standard, and today, campsites are widespread across Europe and North America.
Types
Different types of camping may be named after their form of transportation, such as canoe camping, car camping, RVing, and backpacking, including ultralight backpacking.
Camping is also labeled by lifestyle: Glamping (glamorous camping) combines camping with the luxury and amenities of a home or hotel, and has its roots in the early 1900s European and American safaris in Africa. Workamping allows campers to trade their labor variously for discounts on campsite fees, campground utilities, and even some degree of pay. Migrant camps are formed not for recreation but as a temporary housing arrangement. Campgrounds for custom harvesters in the United States may include room-to-park combines and other large farm equipment. Camping is also popular at air shows, notably at the Oshkosh air show where people often camp in a small tent under their aircraft's wing.
Religious camping
In Evangelical Christianity, camping for a spiritual retreat was encouraged by the development of camp meetings in the 19th century, to promote spiritual renewal, far from the city and in nature. These camps were an opportunity to pray, sing and listen to sermons for several days.
Various evangelical associations have also established campgrounds or conference centers in isolated locations, which provide retreat times for children and adults.
Equipment
The equipment used in camping varies by intended activity. For instance, in survival camping the equipment consists of small items which have the purpose of helping the camper in providing food, heat, and safety. The equipment used in this type of camping must be lightweight and it is restricted to the mandatory items. Other types of camping such as winter camping involve having specially designed equipment in terms of tents or clothing that is strong enough to protect the camper's body from the wind and cold.
Survival camping involves certain items that campers are recommended to have with them in case something goes wrong and they need to be rescued. A survival kit includes mandatory items that are small and must fit in one's pocket or which otherwise could be carried on one's person. This kit is useless in these circumstances if it is kept in the backpack that is left in camp. Such a kit should include a small metal container that can be used to heat water over a campfire, a small length of duct tape which can prove useful in many situations, and an emergency space blanket. These blankets are specially designed to occupy minimal space, can be used as emergency shelters for keeping the camper warm, and their reflective properties mean that they can be easily seen from an aircraft. Candle stubs are good for starting a fire as well as for warming an enclosed space. One or two band-aids are mandatory in this type of camping. Any camper, and not only the survival ones, need waterproof matches or a lighter and a large safety pin or fish hook which can be used in fishing. Rubber gloves, antiseptic wipes, tinfoil, jackknife, or halazone tablets (which purify the water) are also to be included in a survival kit.
List of common equipment
The following is a list of commonly used camping equipment:
First aid kit
Tent, lean-to, or other form of shelter
Hammer or mallet to drive tent stakes into the soil (hammers are often a claw hammer, which is also helpful for removing them)
Sleeping bag and/or blankets for warmth
Sleeping pad or air mattress to be placed underneath the sleeping bag for cushioning from stones and twigs, as well as for insulation from the ground
Lantern or flashlight
Hatchet, axe or saw for cutting firewood for a campfire
Fire starter for starting a campfire
Folding chairs for placement around a campfire
Ropes for stringing clothes line and for securing the shelter
Tarp for adding a layer of storm protection to a tent, and to shelter dining areas
Raincoat or poncho
Hiking boots
Fishing pole
Canteen (bottle)
Chuck box to hold camp kitchen items for food preparation, consumption, and cleanup
Trash bags, for the handling of waste; see leave no trace
Cathole trowel for sanitation in areas where a toilet is not provided
Insect repellent
Sunscreen for protecting skin
rope for climbing or in case someone gets stuck
Personal care products and towel
Cooler to store perishables and beverages. If electricity is available, a thermoelectric or stirling engine cooler can be used without the need for ice. Campers at modern campgrounds will normally bring perishable foods in coolers while backcountry campers will bring non-perishable foods such as dried fruits, nuts, jerky, and MREs.
Bottled water or portable water filter for areas that have access to rivers or lakes
Cooking implements such as a tripod chained grill, Dutch oven, or La Cotta clay pot can be used for cooking on a campfire. A portable stove can be used where campfires are forbidden or impractical. If using a campground with electricity, an electric frying pan or slow cooker can be used.
Firewood for campfires
Emergency Preparedness Kit
Multi-tool or knife
Global Positioning System (GPS)
Much of the remaining needed camping equipment is commonly available in the home, including dishes, pots, and pans; however, many people opt not to use their home items but instead utilize equipment better tailored for camping. These amenities include heavy plastic tableware and salt and pepper shakers with tops that close to shelter the shakers from rain. Old kitchen gear purchased from thrift stores or garage sales may also be used in place of home items as an alternative to buying specialized (and more expensive) camping equipment. Backpackers use lightweight and portable equipment.
Campgrounds and commercial campsites
Campers span a broad range of age, ability, and ruggedness, and campsites are designed in many ways as well. Many campgrounds have sites with facilities such as fire rings, barbecue grills, utilities, shared bathrooms, and laundry, as well as access to nearby recreational facilities, however, not all campsites have similar levels of development. Campsites can range from a patch of dirt to a level, paved pad with sewer and electricity with many public and private campgrounds also offering cabin options. (For more information on facilities, see the campsite and RV park articles.)
Other vehicles used for camping include motorcycles, touring bicycles, boats, canoes, pack animals, and even bush planes; although backpacking on foot is a popular alternative.
Tent camping sites often cost less than campsites with full amenities, and most allow direct access by car. Some "walk-in" sites lie a short walk away from the nearest road but do not require full backpacking equipment. Those who seek a rugged experience in the outdoors prefer to camp with only tents, or with no shelter at all ("under the stars").
Popularity
United States
According to an infographic produced by Red Rover Camping and based on data from the 2014 American Camper Report published by the Coleman Company, Inc. and the Outdoor Foundation, camping in the United States is gaining popularity after a fall of 4.2 million participants from 2011 to 2012.
United Kingdom
According to data provided by the Great British Tourism Survey conducted by Visit England, almost 4.5 million camping and caravanning holidays were taken by British residents during the first half of 2015, for an average of 3.7 nights. As in the United States, camping is gaining popularity, with an 8% increase in trips compared to the same period in 2014. The Caravan Club and the Camping and Caravanning Club represent UK campers.
Scotland allows "wild camping" on privately owned wilderness.
France
Data collected by the Fédération Nationale De L'Hôtellerie De Plein Air (FNHPA) shows that around 113 million nights were taken at French campsites in 2015, which was up by 3.9% in the same period in 2014. French holidaymakers took 77 million of these, and the rest was made up of other nationalities, the majority of whom were Dutch, German, and UK tourists. The French Government hopes to have 100 million tourists each year by 2030. The most popular region for camping is Languedoc and Roussillon with around 19,331,663 nights spent at campsites during 2015, whilst the department with the most campsites is the Vendée.
Canada
Canada is a country that has four different seasons throughout the year. In this day and age, with the proper camping equipment, it is possible to camp all over Canada all year round. At the end of the 19th century, Canada started establishing areas all over the territory to be later named "National Parks". These days, the parks are now known for being some of the most popular campgrounds in the country. But it was not always accessible to everyone. In Canada, before the 1910s, camping was reserved only for men. The first camping ground to be established in a National Park in Canada was in 1964 at the Lake Louise.
According to data by a study made by Camping Québec Archived 2022-07-14 at the Wayback Machine in 2016, 20% of the province of Québec did go camping, that being about 1,600,000 people. In the same research, the study has shown that a certain 8% of those campers were strangers. The popularity of camping in Canada is not only for locals but also for travelers. About 34% of the camp fanatics in Québec are camping on either National Parks or Provincials Parks.
Australia
According to the Australian government, camping and caravan holds a special place in the hearts of many Australians, as it offers a unique opportunity to connect with the country's diverse natural landscapes and rich outdoor heritage. Australia benefits from a favorable climate and an expansive array of camping grounds and sites throughout the country.
Before the onset of COVID-19, there was a notable 67% increase in the number of caravan and camping trips over the preceding decade. In the year concluding in 2019, Australians embarked on a record-breaking 13.9 million caravan and camping journeys. Of these excursions, commercial caravan parks and camping grounds contributed to 52% of trips, 62% of nights spent, and 64% of total expenditure. Since the lifting of COVID-related restrictions, there has been a strong rebound in numbers. By the conclusion of the year in June 2022, trips had reached 12.7 million, while spending surged to an unprecedented $10.5 billion. With over 770,000 caravan and campervan registrations nationwide in 2021, this upward trend is poised to persist.
Camping and public access
Camping on open land, regardless of ownership, is legal in a few countries, including Sweden and Scotland. In Sweden, a right of public access – allowing outdoor recreational activity on privately held wilderness – is enshrined in the constitution. Large groups, however, must obtain the landowner's permission. In Scotland, people may camp on most unenclosed land, whether state- or privately owned. There is however a "leave-no-trace" policy and a common-law outdoor-access code.
In popular culture
Many films and other media have focused on camping or portrayed events regarding camping. Music includes the c. 1962 Phil Ochs album, Camp Favorites.

Camping and Woodcraft is an American classic published by Horace Kephart in 1916, detailing the practical skill-sets needed to endure the harsh conditions of the wilderness, and to make that experience more enjoyable to the amateur outdoorsman. The work is a revised and expanded edition of Kephart's 1906 Camping and Woodcraft, a pocket-manual published by the author with the expressed purpose of rendering practical advice and skills to those who travel with minimal gear in places where there are no roads. The 1906 printing of the pocket-manual passed through 7 editions in the space of ten years.
Kephart's work, as an instructive manual on where and how to camp, follows in the footsteps of E.R. Wallace's Descriptive Guide to the Adirondacks and Handbook of Travel (1875). Much of the material, however, used in the compilation of Kephart's book is based on the author's own first-hand experiences in the wilderness and which he transcribed in the field.
Revised edition
The 1916 revised edition consists of two-volumes, each volume containing 23 chapters, replete with illustrations. Among the topics discussed by the author in the first volume on Camping are Tent construction (covering a wide-variety of tents and makeshift shelters), along with their maintenance and methods used in waterproofing; Camp bedding; Clothing; Personal kits; Provisions (with the nutritional value of different foodstuffs); Camp making; the Camp fire; and Camp cookery, among other things. In the second volume on Woodcraft, the author treats on knots, hitches and lashings in the 16th chapter of this work, and discusses in its 18th chapter the manner of tanning skins, as well as brings down an inventory of edible plants found in the regions of North America with which he was familiar. Kephart also instructs his readers, in volume 2, what to do if they are ever lost in the woods, and elaborates on how to render first-aid in cases of accidents and emergencies.
Kephart occasionally draws upon his familiarity with the survival skills of the Native American Indians:
Genuine Indian-tanned buckskin is, properly speaking, not tanned at all. Tanned leather has undergone a chemical change, from the tannin or other chemicals used in converting it from the raw hide to leather. Buckskin, on the contrary, is still a raw skin that has been made supple and soft by breaking up the fibers mechanically and has then merely been treated with brains and smoke to preserve its softness. In color and pliability it is somewhat like what is called chamois skin, but it is far stronger and has the singular property that although it shrinks some after wetting and gets stiff in drying, it can easily be made soft as ever by merely rubbing it in the hands.
Reception
The Boston Evening Transcript's review compared Camping and Woodcraft to a textbook in terms of completeness, and concluded that it is an "invaluable" resource for outdoor enthusiasts. The Post-Standard similarly noted: "Mr Kephart manages in this book to cover the whole subject, from underwear to snake bites." The Brooklyn Daily Eagle's review concluded that the book is "of real service and value" to both novices and those already experienced in outdoor living.
According to Morgan Simmons of the Knoxville News Sentinel, the book has gained a "diehard following" in the years since it was first published.

A Canaanean blade is an archaeological term for a long, wide blade made out of stone or flint, predominantly found at sites in Israel and Lebanon (ancient Canaan).
History
They were first manufactured and used in the Neolithic Stone Age to be used as weapons such as javelins or arrowheads. The same technology was used during the later Chalcolithic period in the production of broad sickle blade elements for harvesting of crops. Canaanean blades were also used in the threshing of cereal grains. This indicates the presence of early agricultural technologies.
Use
The blades would be attached to a small wooden platform with bitumen. The platform, with a human or other weight standing on it, was then pulled behind an animal across a threshing floor. The forward motion of the animal paired with the downward force of weight exerted through the blades served to cut grain into small pieces.

Canadian Lumber Standard, typically abbrievated as CLS, is a type and standard/grade of processed and sawn lumber (timber) used in many countries.
History
CLS was originally a product of Canada used in the construction of sturdy timber-framed houses as rated by the Canadian Lumber Standards Accreditation Board (CLSAB). Following the end of the Cold War it was increasingly used by manufacturers in Baltic countries as a reference grade for export to the UK and other Western European countries. For these reasons, Latvian CLS, Swedish CLS and other European graded timber are now available, despite not originating from Canada. Most CLS now originates from Europe, including Scandinavia.
Usage
CLS is primarily used in internal construction because of is strength and durability. As such, CLS is widely utilised as a general standard for timber suitable for wall studs, DIY and other construction projects, including housebuilding. It is very commonly employed in conventional timber frames for roofs, lofts and attics. It is typically used in the UK for timber wall studs.
For use outside, CLS timber should be treated for external use.
Details
CLS timber is kiln-dried and is white wood. Tree sources include Fir, Pine and Spruce.
CLS is planed and finished with eased or rounded edges. CLS timber is commonly graded at two strengths, C16 or C24. C24 is the stronger and is typically more expensive.
It is often pressure treated and may also be treated with pesticides to stop insect and fungal growth.

In the context of furniture, caning is a method of weaving chair seats and other furniture, either while building new chairs or in the process of cane chair repair.
Furniture or chair caning may be confused with wicker; chair caning is specifically the craft of applying rattan cane or rattan peel to a piece of furniture such as the backs or seats of chairs, whereas wicker or wicker work is a reference to the craft of weaving any number of materials such as willow or rattan reeds as well as man-made paper based cords.
Rattan
In common use, the term cane may refer to any plant with a long, thin stem. However, the cane used for furniture is derived from the rattan vine native to Indonesia, the Philippines, and Malaysia. The vines typically grow to 100–300 feet (30–90 m) in length; most have a diameter less than 1 inch (25 mm). Before export, the rattan stems are cut to uniform lengths and the bark is removed in narrow strips of 1⁄16 to 3⁄16 inch (2 to 5 mm).
Sugar cane and bamboo (sometimes called "cane" in the southern United States) should not be confused with rattan cane.
Rattan vine looks somewhat similar to bamboo but is quite different in that bamboo is hollow and holds itself upright while rattan is a solid flexible vine that needs the support of surrounding structure to elevate itself off the forest floor. It climbs to the top of canopies of the forest to reach sunlight with the help of large rugged thorns that grab hold of surrounding trees. Sometimes much of the length of these rugged vines are draped along the forest floor from tree to tree in search of a suitable structure to climb.

Canopy soils, also known as arboreal soils, exist in areas of the forest canopy where branches, crevices, or some other physical feature on a tree can accumulate organic matter, such as leaves or fine branches. Eventually, this organic matter weathers into some semblance of a soil, and can reach depths of 30 cm in some temperate rainforests.
Epiphytes can take root in the canopy soil, which accelerates the development of the soil by adding organic material and physically breaking up material with their root system. The nutrients that become stored within canopy soils can then be utilized by the epiphytes that grow in them, and even the tree that the canopy soil is accumulating in through the growth of canopy roots. This storage allows nutrients to be more closely cycled through an ecosystem, and prevents nutrients from being washed out of the system. The nitrogen cycle is most prevalent in canopy soil ecosystems with regards to the biogeochemical cycles that naturally exist within forest environments.
Canopy soils play a role in maintaining the normal functioning of forest ecosystems that they exist in. Canopy soils are acutely vulnerable to climate changes, human disturbances, and other various disturbances that may occur. The decomposition of epiphytic communities due to these factors can impact these soils and their environments negatively.
Development
Numerous factors are involved in evaluating the characteristics of a developing canopy soil. The types of plant material that accumulate on canopy soils can strongly influence the conditions that develop, including pH, moisture content, nutrient content, and nutrient availability for the soil. The age of the canopy is also important to its development. Older canopies can accumulate more material and create a deeper soil. Within the soil, the organic material will further decompose in an older canopy soil, and will have less fibrous material than a younger canopy soil. Perhaps more intuitively, the height at which organic material begins to accumulate can also significantly impact the development of canopy soils. Canopy soils higher in a forest's canopy will be more exposed to the elements, resulting in a higher exposure to sunlight and wind, which could result in extreme shifts in available soil moisture.
Most epiphytes have very shallow root systems, mainly used to attach them to their host tree. Thus moisture-dependent epiphytes in shallow root systems are more sensitive to changes in moisture content, and at risk of desiccation. In contrast, canopy soils that form lower in the canopy are more likely to be sheltered from more extreme swings in light exposure and moisture content. Additionally, lower canopy soils also have a greater chance of accumulating organic matter that falls from higher neighboring trees, or from the higher regions of the tree housing the canopy soil. This allows these lower canopy soils to accumulate more organic matter and nutrients, which allows them to be more productive.
The organisms that inhabit a soil significantly influence the development and the turnover time of nutrients, and the same is true for canopy soils. Macro-organisms such as mites and maggots can consume organic material and break it down in their digestive tracts, aiding in the mixing and formation of soil. Microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi essentially serve the same purpose, but use different degradation pathways. The presence of these organisms is critical in maintaining the nutrient cycles within the soil, and make available the necessary nutrients for the growth of epiphytes and the micro-ecosystem. The microorganism community found in canopy soils has been found to be distinct, but similar to the communities found in the soil of the forest floor.
Distribution and evolution
Vascular epiphytes represent in total about 9% of all vascular plants in the world, but are much more common in tropical areas. This under-representation of vascular epiphyte diversity is still being disputed, but likely pertains to a few abiotic factors including cooler temperatures, moisture availability, and glacial history. The distributions of epiphytes when pertaining to the Northern and Southern hemispheres is extremely asymmetric. The temperate zones in the southern hemisphere have a much greater abundance of vascular epiphytes than in the northern hemisphere, and they persist further into more polar latitudes. This suggests that abiotic factors such as temperature are far less influential than the glacial history of the region. During the Last Glacial Maximum, about 27,000 years ago, much of the area now occupied by temperate rainforests in the northern hemisphere was covered by extensive ice sheets that removed all life. In contrast, temperate rainforests in the southern hemisphere remained largely ice-free. This strongly favored ecosystems in the southern hemisphere, and allowed many more species of obligate, vascular epiphytes to evolve and occupy a particular niche. The intimate relationship that vascular epiphytes have with the formation of canopy soils means that the distributions of canopy soils follow a parallel distribution pattern, as it is the pattern of growth and decay of epiphytic growth that promotes the formation of canopy soils.
The presence of certain types of epiphytes could be considered ecosystem engineers, as they can form new canopy soils within an upper story in forest. For example, Fascicularia bicolor is a species of epiphyte in South American temperate rainforests, and belongs to a group known as trash basket epiphytes. These form extensive mats that capture falling organic matter and accumulate it, promoting the formation of canopy soils. These mats regulate the temperature and humidity of the surrounding canopy, and alter the species diversity of epiphytic growth, which should classify them as an ecosystem engineer.
Canopy Soils and Nitrogen Cycle
Recent research has shown that canopy soils are involved in biogeochemical cycling, specifically nitrogen cycling. The nitrogen cycling process observed in canopy soils not only contributes heavily to growth within the canopy, but can also affect the fertility of soil on the forest floor. The rate at which canopy soils release nitrogen is higher than that of forest floors, likely meaning canopy soils are a main siphon of nitrogen for epiphytes within a canopy. However, canopy soils' rate of gross nitrification is around the same or even lower compared to that of forest floor soil. This could be due to the higher acidity measured in canopy soils than observed in forest floor soils.
The nitrogen cycling process that occurs within canopy soils is an important source of nitrogen for epiphytes throughout different elevations. The same way that epiphytes and canopy soils share a symbiotic relationship, forest floor soils and canopy soils are also reliant on one another. Decreasing nutrient availability in the forest floor soil can harm canopy soil proliferation. Nitrogen gas fixation within canopy soils is tied closely with environmental variation as a whole, but specifically, this process is dependent on seasonal changes in tropical rainforest biomes.
Conservation and Impact
Canopy soils play a role in providing habit for a diverse array of plants and animals, forest nutrient cycling and other biogeochemical cycles as well as biodiversity within ecosystems. Epiphyte prevalence and vitality contribute to the impact of these factors. The process by which epiphyte communities develop and proliferate is slow and vulnerable to changes in climate, temperature, and overall disturbances. Abundance of canopy soil is linked to larger trees as these trees provide more canopy for which soil can exist. Larger canopy soil ecosystems, while more abundant, are at higher risk of being affected by both climate change and other natural disruptions as well as human-made interferences.
Canopy soils are challenging to study as they are highly vulnerable to environmental changes. Canopy soil ecosystems disappear at a faster rate they can be studied. This is especially prevalent in old-growth forests. Human disturbance such as logging and climate change are leading contributors to the degradation of canopy soils and respective forests they occupy.
Old-growth forests in general and those with greater amounts of epiphytic activity have higher levels of biodiversity, species richness, and abundance of organisms compared to that of secondary forests. Considering that canopy soil proliferation is dependent upon healthy epiphyte development, threats to epiphyte vitality harm canopy soil ecosystems. Epiphyte populations are extremely vulnerable to a variety of changes within the climate. For example, epiphytes have been found to obtain a considerable amount of their diet from sources in the atmosphere. When atmospheric changes occur, epiphytes struggle to persist due to a lack of suitable nutrients. Epiphyte deterioration negatively affects canopy soil life as well as ecosystem function. Epiphytes act as a food and water resource for many animals that live in canopy soil ecosystems while also providing habitat.

Canopy walkways – also called canopy walks, treetop walks or treetop walkways – provide pedestrian access to a forest canopy. Early walkways consisted of bridges between trees in the canopy of a forest; mostly linked up with platforms inside or around the trees. They were originally intended as access to the upper regions of ancient forests for scientists conducting canopy research. Eventually, because they provided only limited, one-dimensional access to the trees, they were abandoned for canopy cranes. Today they serve as ecotourism attractions in places such as Dhlinza Forest, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, Taman Negara National Park, Malaysia, Sedim River, Kulim, Nyungwe National Park, Rwanda and Kakum National Park, Ghana.
Australia
Canopy or treetop walkways are especially popular attractions in Australia. They can be found in most states and a variety of environments.
Tasmania
The Tahune AirWalk is located in state forest near Geeveston in southern Tasmania. Opened in 2001 it consists of a 619-metre-long elevated walkway incorporating a 37-metre-high observation tower and a cantilever 50 metres above the Huon River. Other activities at the complex include zip-line hang gliding.
Victoria
The Otway Fly claims to be the longest and highest 'steel canopy walk' in the world, It is 600 metres (2,000 ft) long with a maximum height of 47 metres (154 ft). Located on freehold land in the Otway Range in western Victoria, the walk traverses mixed-species forest with trees such as myrtle beech and mountain ash, the tallest hardwood species in the world. The mid-story environment includes an abundance of soft tree ferns and other smaller trees. The Otway Fly also offers zip-line tours where customers can glide 30 metres (98 ft) above the floor of the rainforest. The walkway was built in 2003 for $6.5 million and features a raised walking platform as well as a cantilever over Young's Creek and a 47-metre-tall (154 ft) 'spiral tower' viewing platform that takes the person into the upper canopy. It was originally operated by MFS Living and Leisure before being sold in 2011 to Merlin Entertainments, one of the world's largest operators of tourist attractions.
Victoria also boasts the Donna Buang Rainforest Gallery. Located east of Melbourne at Cement Creek on the slopes of Mount Donna Buang, it consists of a 350-metre-long metal walkway elevated one metre above ground level plus a cantilever platform 15 metres (49 ft) above the ground which allows canopy level views of the cool temperate rainforest. While there is interpretive signage, the Rainforest Gallery is unstaffed and entry is free.
In 2018 a small, 120-metre-long, 10-metre-high, canopy walkway opened at the seaside resort town of Lorne as part of Live Wire Park, a mainly zip line-oriented business. Unlike other canopy walkways in the state which are in rainforest, this one traverses scenic, open coastal woodland.
New South Wales
The Illawarra Fly Treetop Adventure includes a 500-metre-long steel walkway up to 30 metres above the ground and a 45-metre-high tower with views over the nearby Tasman Sea. The facility also includes zip-line tours. Built in 2008 for a cost of $6.5 million, like the Ottway Fly it was initially operated by MFS Living and Leisure until 2011 when it was sold to Merlin Entertainments.
The Skywalk at Dorrigo National Park is a short, 70-metre-long canopy walk that leads over the edge of an escarpment to a point 21 metres above the forest.
Queensland
The Mamu Tropical Skywalk is located near Innisfail in the north of the state. Owned by the Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service, it was opened in 2008. It features a 350-metre-long elevated walkway that makes its way through tropical rainforest 15 metres above the ground and includes a 37-metre-high observation tower.
The Tree Top Walk, was the first canopy walkway constructed in Australia. It can be found in Lamington National Park at O'Reilly's Rainforest Retreat, in southern Queensland. Built in 1988, it is 180 metres in length and constructed using 9 small suspension bridges. At its highest point it reaches 34 metres above ground level.
Tamborine Rainforest Skywalk is a 1.5 km walk with 300 metres on bridges and a cantilever extension over the forest. It opened in 2009.
The Daintree Discovery Centre Aerial Walkway in far north Queensland traverses tropical rainforest at 11 metres above the ground. It leads to a five-level, 23-metre-high observation tower.
Western Australia
Valley of the Giants Treetop Walk near Denmark in southern Western Australia is 620 metres long and includes sections up to 40 metres above the ground. It is owned by the state government's Department of Parks and Wildlife.
Brunei
The Ulu Temburong National Park features an especially high (60 metres) forest canopy walkway that connects a series of treehouses. It is accessed by longboat.
Costa Rica
The Sky Walk is a walk above the canopy of the trees of the Monteverde Cloud Forest. Sky Walk features a combination of suspension bridges and trails with heights exceeding the treetops. Sky Walk is part of a larger forest tourism complex that includes walking tracks, a pulsed gondola and ziplines.
Germany
The Baumwipfelpfad in Neuschonau, Bavaria, is a 1,300-metre-long walkway between 8 and 25 metres above the forest floor. It ends with a spiral climb up a 44-metre-high wooden dome.
The Baumwipfelpfad Harz (also Baumwipfelpfad Bad Harzburg) (de) is an educational and treetop path in the Harz Mountains in the area of the town of Bad Harzburg in the district of Goslar, Lower Saxony. The treetop path can be reached via an entry crown that spirals upwards over a length of around 300 meters (980 ft). The construction costs amounted to approx. 4.6 million euros and the construction project was carried out from November 2014 to March 2015. The treetop path was put into operation on 8 May 2015.
The Baumwipfelpfad – Saarschleife in Mettlach, Saarland is a 1,250-metre-long walkway reaching up to 23 meters (75 ft) above the ground. The observation tower at the end of the path reaches a height of 43 meters (141 ft).
The Baumkronenpfad at Hainich National Park. Only a 10 km drive away you can discover the canopy walkway at the UNESCO World Natural Heritage Hainich National Park. Walk in the tree tops up to 24 meters (79 ft) in height or climb the viewer tower with 44 meters (144 ft). Insights into the biospheres offer the National park exhibition and the latest milestone the "Root hole". Nature lovers can hike and bike 18 trails and 3 cycle trails in untouched nature. www.baumkronen-pfad.de
Ghana
The Kakum Canopy Walkway extends for more than 300 metres and includes a viewing platform and seven bridges up to 35 metres above the forest floor.
Malaysia
The Danum Valley Canopy Walkway, located in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo gives visitors views of spectacular tropical rainforest from a 300-metre-long, 27-metre-high canopy walkway.
The Sungai Sedim Treetop Walkway located in Kedah, is 925 meters long.
New Zealand
Located on the rugged West Coast of the South Island of New Zealand, the West Coast Treetop Walk traverses rimu forest and was built by Australian eco-tourism company Canopy01 in 2012. It comprises a 450-metre-long elevated steel walkway and cantilever at heights up to 25 metres above the forest floor with a 47-metre-high viewing tower.
At Rotorua on the North Island, Rotorua Canopy Tours operate zipline tours that incorporate sections of canopy walkway.
Nigeria
The country has the largest land mass in west Africa. It has 3 canopy walkways sited in Lagos and Cross river states. The longest Canopy walkway in Africa is at Lekki Conservation Centre which is a project sponsored by Chevron but managed and supervised by The Nigerian Conservation Foundation. The walkway is 401 metres long transversing the unique nature reserve, 22.5 metres high, the canopy walkway was handed over to the Nigerian Conservation Foundation by the Lagos state government 23–12–2015.
Peru
The Inkaterra Canopy Walkway in the Peruvian Amazon is a 344-metre-long system of seven hanging bridges, six treetop observation platforms and two 29-metre-tall towers.
Samoa
At Falealupo, a village in Samoa situated at the west end of Savai'i island is the short Falealupo Rainforest Canopy Aerial Walkway which is up to 40 metres above the ground and passes through Banyan trees. It was built in 1997 and is part of a project to protect the rainforest and generate income for the local community through tourism.
Singapore
The Southern Ridges Forest Walk is a 1.3 km elevated metal walkway soaring as high as 18 meters above the ground, on level with the treetops. One of the most impressive sections of the Southern Ridges Walk. About halfway through, the walk returns to earth for a moment, paralleling Preston Road and its "black and white" bungalows originally built for the officers of the British army and now much favored by wealthy expats in Singapore. The Southern Ridges Canopy Walk is a 280 m (920 ft) elevated metal walkway similar to the forest walk, somewhat shorter but among higher trees and closer to the trees as well.
The HSBC Treetop Walk is a 250-metre suspension bridge connecting the two highest points in MacRitchie – Bukit Pierce and Bukit Kalang. At the highest point, the bridge hangs 25 metres from the forest floor.
The SPH Walk of Giants in the Singapore Botanic Gardens is a 260 m-long (850 ft) elevated boardwalk with a maximum height from the ground of 8 m. It leads the visitor through a collection of trees which, can grow up to at least 60 m in height, some up to 80 m.
Switzerland
The Baumwipfelpfad Neckertal is a 500 metres (1,600 ft) long and up to 15 metres (49 ft) high canopy walkway in Mogelsberg, in the Toggenburg region of the canton of St. Gallen.
Taiwan
The 800-metre-long Canopy Walkway at Guanyin Mountain Treetop Walkway, located in the Wugu District of New Taipei City, Taiwan, is a popular attraction in the Guanyinshan Scenic Area. It provides visitors with views of the surrounding landscapes, including the Tamsui River and Taipei city.
Thailand
The 400-metre-long Canopy Walkway at Queen Sirikit Botanic Garden in Mae Rim District, Chiang Mai Province opened in 2015.
United Kingdom
The 200-metre-long Treetop Walkway is at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew in London. It opened in 2008 and is not a forest walkway, but rather gives views over a mostly open park. It claims to give visitors an insight into forest canopies and the birds, insects and fungi that live there. Near the walkway is a unique tunnel allowing visitors to learn about tree roots before they climb to the walkway.
United States
Florida
Myakka River State Park in Southwest Florida hosts North America's first canopy walkway, which runs 100 feet among oak and palm trees.
Discovery Island in Bay Lake at Walt Disney World operated from 1974 to 1999 and featured a canopy walkway in the Avian Way attraction. In 2017, it was dilapidated but still largely intact.
Georgia
The Kendeda Canopy Walk in the Atlanta Botanical Garden is a more recent variation that provides visitors with the ability to move through a 180-metre-long (600 ft) the Storza Woods section of urban forest at an elevation of 12 metres (40 ft). The walkway construction is a somewhat unusual reverse suspension design. It opened in 2010 and cost $55 million to build.
Michigan
The 426-meter-long (1,398-foot) Whiting Forest of Dow Gardens canopy walk overlooks 54 acres of forest trails, ponds, meadows, and an apple orchard. Located in mid-Michigan, the canopy walk is currently the longest in the United States of America, with the highest point being 12 meters (39 feet) above the ground. It opened in the fall of 2018 with an investment of $20 million.

Carbonyl metallurgy is used to manufacture products of iron, nickel, steel, and other metals. Coatings are produced by vapor plating using metal carbonyl vapors. These are metal-ligand complexes where carbon monoxide is bonded to individual atoms of metals .
Iron carbonyl is stable as iron pentacarbonyl, where five carbon monoxide molecules are pendently bonded to the iron atom, while nickel carbonyl is stable as nickel tetracarbonyl, which has four carbon monoxide molecules pendantly bonded to the nickel atom. Both can be formed by the exposure of the powdered metal to carbon monoxide gas at temperatures of around 75 degrees Celsius. Both the metal carbonyls decompose near 175 °C, resulting in a vapor plated metallic coating. The thickness of the vapor plated deposit can be increased to desired thicknesses by controlling the amount of metal carbonyl used and the duration of the plating process.
Vale Inco produces over 100 million pounds (ca. 45000 tonnes) of nickel metal annually by the carbonyl process. The carbonyl process has been used to produce molds in custom shapes for industry. Such molds have been used in plastic molding and other manufacturing techniques.
William Jenkin developed many of the techniques and procedures used in carbonyl metallurgy.
Carbonyl metallurgy is useful as a low-temperature metal coating technique that may find many applications in the future.

In theatre, a carpenter is a stagehand who builds sets and stage elements. They usually are hired by the production manager, crew chief or technical director. In some less common cases, they may be hired by the director, or producer. They are usually paid by the hour.
Carpenters receive drafting from the technical director who uses the designers' renderings, models, and/or drafting of the set to create the technical drawings for the production. Working mainly with woods and metals, they use techniques that include woodworking and welding. They build set pieces, including some standard elements—flats, platforms and columns—as well as pieces of the stage. For example, a carpenter may be responsible for building stairs and ramps on and off of the performance area and for leveling the stage floor itself.
Only carpenters trained as riggers are trusted to do rigging (see fly crew). Often union houses and some larger theatres make distinctions between carpenters and riggers, but most smaller theatres do not, due to staffing limitations.
Professional carpenters do not work on anything with an electrical component (see electrician). They also do not paint the set, as this is the job of a scenic artist.
Often, stage carpentry for a large production is organized with one "master carpenter" or "shop foreman" and many subordinate carpenters.

A carpenter pencil (carpentry pencil, carpenter's pencil) is a pencil that has a body with a rectangular or elliptical cross-section to allow it to be used as a quick reference to 1/4 and 1/2 inch measurements (15mm and 7.5mm in metric versions). The shape also helps prevent it from rolling away as a secondary function.
Carpenter pencils are easier to grip than standard pencils, because they have a larger surface area. Some of the companies producing this type of pencil are C.H. Hanson and Musgrave Pencil Company.
Overview
The non-round core allows thick or thin lines to be made by holding the pencil slightly rotated, particularly useful in carpentry where thin lines are required for high precision markings and are easy to erase, but thick markings are needed to mark rough surfaces.
The pencil is robust and strong to endure heavy duty environments like a tool box, construction site, or carpentry shop. The core is typically stronger than in other pencils. As such, carpenter pencils are often used by builders because they can mark on surfaces like concrete or stone. The shape and lead density aid in marking legible lines with a straight edge that are clear and easy to follow with a saw blade.
Carpenter pencils are typically manually sharpened with a knife, although special sharpeners can be used.
The earliest versions of the flat pencil were made in around 1560 by hollowing out sticks of juniper wood, then pushing the graphite through the channel. By the 1660 the technique had been refined: two wooden halves were carved with a groove running down them, a plumbago stick placed in one of the grooves, and the two halves then glued together—essentially the same method in use to this day.
Carpenter pencils are sometimes used for their artistic practicality, as they allow artists to draw either a thick or a thin line easily with the same tool. Additionally, the width of the pencil makes it possible to notch the graphite core enabling the user to draw two parallel lines at once, a technique used by artists and calligraphers.

Carpentry is a skilled trade and a craft in which the primary work performed is the cutting, shaping and installation of building materials during the construction of buildings, ships, timber bridges, concrete formwork, etc. Carpenters traditionally worked with natural wood and did rougher work such as framing, but today many other materials are also used and sometimes the finer trades of cabinetmaking and furniture building are considered carpentry. In the United States, 98.5% of carpenters are male, and it was the fourth most male-dominated occupation in the country in 1999. In 2006 in the United States, there were about 1.5 million carpentry positions. Carpenters are usually the first tradesmen on a job and the last to leave. Carpenters normally framed post-and-beam buildings until the end of the 19th century; now this old-fashioned carpentry is called timber framing. Carpenters learn this trade by being employed through an apprenticeship training—normally four years—and qualify by successfully completing that country's competence test in places such as the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Switzerland, Australia and South Africa. It is also common that the skill can be learned by gaining work experience other than a formal training program, which may be the case in many places.
Carpentry covers various services, such as furniture design and construction, door and window installation or repair, flooring installation, trim and molding installation, custom woodworking, stair construction, structural framing, wood structure and furniture repair, and restoration.
Etymology
The word "carpenter" is the English rendering of the Old French word carpentier (later, charpentier) which is derived from the Latin carpentarius [artifex], "(maker) of a carriage." The Middle English and Scots word (in the sense of "builder") was wright (from the Old English wryhta, cognate with work), which could be used in compound forms such as wheelwright or boatwright.
In the United Kingdom
In the UK, carpentry is used to describe the skill involved in first fixing of timber items such as construction of roofs, floors and timber framed buildings, i.e. those areas of construction that are normally hidden in a finished building. An easy way to envisage this is that first fix work is all that is done before plastering takes place. The second fix is done after plastering takes place. Second fix work, the installation of items such as skirting boards, architraves, doors, and windows are generally regarded as carpentry, however, the off-site manufacture and pre-finishing of the items is regarded as joinery. Carpentry is also used to construct the formwork into which concrete is poured during the building of structures such as roads and highway overpasses. In the UK, the skill of making timber formwork for poured or in situ concrete is referred to as shuttering.
In the United States
Carpentry in the United States is historically defined similarly to the United Kingdom as the "heavier and stronger" work distinguished from a joiner "...who does lighter and more ornamental work than that of a carpenter..." although the "...work of a carpenter and joiner are often combined." Joiner is less common than the terms finish carpenter or cabinetmaker. The terms housewright and barnwright were used historically and are now occasionally used by carpenters who work using traditional methods and materials. Someone who builds custom concrete formwork is a form carpenter.
History
Along with stone, wood is among the oldest building materials. The ability to shape it into tools, shelter, and weapons improved with technological advances from the Stone Age to the Bronze Age to the Iron Age. Some of the oldest archaeological evidence of carpentry are water well casings. These include an oak and hazel structure dating from 5256 BC, found in Ostrov, Czech Republic, and one built using split oak timbers with mortise and tenon and notched corners excavated in eastern Germany, dating from about 7,000 years ago in the early Neolithic period.
Relatively little history of carpentry was preserved before written language. Knowledge and skills were simply passed down over the generations. Even the advent of cave painting and writing recorded little. The oldest surviving complete architectural text is Vitruvius' ten books collectively titled De architectura, which discuss some carpentry. It was only with the invention of the printing press in the 15th century that this began to change, albeit slowly, with builders finally beginning to regularly publish guides and pattern books in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Some of the oldest surviving wooden buildings in the world are temples in China such as the Nanchan Temple built in 782, Greensted Church in England, parts of which are from the 11th century, and the stave churches in Norway from the 12th and 13th centuries.
Europe
By the 16th century, sawmills were coming into use in Europe. The founding of America was partly based on a desire to extract resources from the new continent including wood for use in ships and buildings in Europe. In the 18th century part of the Industrial Revolution was the invention of the steam engine and cut nails. These technologies combined with the invention of the circular saw led to the development of balloon framing which was the beginning of the decline of traditional timber framing.
The 19th century saw the development of electrical engineering and distribution which allowed the development of hand-held power tools, wire nails, and machines to mass-produce screws. In the 20th century, portland cement came into common use and concrete foundations allowed carpenters to do away with heavy timber sills. Also, drywall (plasterboard) came into common use replacing lime plaster on wooden lath. Plywood, engineered lumber, and chemically treated lumber also came into use.
For types of carpentry used in America see American historic carpentry.
Training
Carpentry requires training which involves both acquiring knowledge and physical practice. In formal training a carpenter begins as an apprentice, then becomes a journeyman, and with enough experience and competency can eventually attain the status of a master carpenter. Today pre-apprenticeship training may be gained through non-union vocational programs such as high school shop classes and community colleges.
Informally a laborer may simply work alongside carpenters for years learning skills by observation and peripheral assistance. While such an individual may obtain journeyperson status by paying the union entry fee and obtaining a journeyperson's card (which provides the right to work on a union carpentry crew) the carpenter foreperson will, by necessity, dismiss any worker who presents the card but does not demonstrate the expected skill level.
Carpenters may work for an employer or be self-employed. No matter what kind of training a carpenter has had, some U.S. states require contractors to be licensed which requires passing a written test and having minimum levels of insurance.
Schools and programs
Formal training in the carpentry trade is available in seminars, certificate programs, high-school programs, online classes, in the new construction, restoration, and preservation carpentry fields. Sometimes these programs are called pre-apprenticeship training.
In the modern British construction industry, carpenters are trained through apprenticeship schemes where general certificates of secondary education (GCSE) in Mathematics, English, and Technology help but are not essential. However, this is deemed the preferred route, as young people can earn and gain field experience whilst training towards a nationally recognized qualification.
There are two main divisions of training: construction-carpentry and cabinetmaking. During pre-apprenticeship, trainees in each of these divisions spend 30 hours a week for 12 weeks in classrooms and indoor workshops learning mathematics, trade terminology, and skill in the use of hand and power tools. Construction-carpentry trainees also participate in calisthenics to prepare for the physical aspect of the work.
Upon completion of pre-apprenticeship, trainees who have passed the graded curriculum (taught by highly experienced journeyperson carpenters) are assigned to a local union and to union carpentry crews at work on construction sites or in cabinet shops as First Year Apprentices. Over the next four years, as they progress in status to Second Year, Third Year, and Fourth Year Apprentice, apprentices periodically return to the training facility every three months for a week of more detailed training in specific aspects of the trade.
In the United States, fewer than 5% of carpenters identify as female. A number of schools in the U.S.
appeal to non-traditional tradespeople by offering carpentry classes for and taught by women, including Hammerstone: Carpentry for Women in Ithaca, NY, Yestermorrow in Waitsfield, VT and Oregon Tradeswomen in Portland, OR.
Apprenticeships and journeyperson
Tradesmen in countries such as Germany and Australia are required to fulfill formal apprenticeships (usually three to four years) to work as professional carpenters. Upon graduation from the apprenticeship, they are known as journeyperson carpenters.
Up through the 19th and even the early 20th century, the journeyperson traveled to another region of the country to learn the building styles and techniques of that area before (usually) returning home. In modern times, journeypeople are not required to travel, and the term now refers to a level of proficiency and skill. Union carpenters in the United States, that is, members of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, are required to pass a skills test to be granted official journeyperson status, but uncertified professional carpenters may also be known as journeypersons based on their skill level, years of experience, or simply because they support themselves in the trade and not due to any certification or formal woodworking education.
Professional status as a journeyperson carpenter in the United States may be obtained in a number of ways. Formal training is acquired in a four-year apprenticeship program administered by the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, in which journeyperson status is obtained after successful completion of twelve weeks of pre-apprenticeship training, followed by four years of on-the-job field training working alongside journeyperson carpenters. The Timber Framers Guild also has a formal apprenticeship program for traditional timber framing. Training is also available in groups like the Kim Bồng woodworking village in Vietnam where apprentices live and work to learn woodworking and carpentry skills.
In Canada, each province sets its own standards for apprenticeship. The average length of time is four years and includes a minimum number of hours of both on-the-job training and technical instruction at a college or other institution. Depending on the number of hours of instruction an apprentice receives, they can earn a Certificate of Proficiency, making them a journeyperson, or a Certificate of Qualification, which allows them to practice a more limited amount of carpentry. Canadian carpenters also have the option of acquiring an additional Interprovincial Red Seal that allows them to practice anywhere in Canada. The Red Seal requires the completion of an apprenticeship and an additional examination.
Master carpenter
After working as a journeyperson for a while, a carpenter may go on to study or test as a master carpenter. In some countries, such as Germany, Iceland and Japan, this is an arduous and expensive process, requiring extensive knowledge (including economic and legal knowledge) and skill to achieve master certification; these countries generally require master status for anyone employing and teaching apprentices in the craft. In others, like the United States, 'master carpenter' can be a loosely used term to describe any skilled carpenter.
Fully trained carpenters and joiners will often move into related trades such as shop fitting, scaffolding, bench joinery, maintenance and system installation.
Materials
Carpenters traditionally worked with natural wood which has been prepared by splitting (riving), hewing, or sawing with a pit saw or sawmill called lumber (American English) or timber (British English). Today natural and engineered lumber and many other building materials carpenters may use are typically prepared by others and delivered to the job site. In 2013 the carpenters union in America used the term carpenter for a catch-all position. Tasks performed by union carpenters include installing "...flooring, windows, doors, interior trim, cabinetry, solid surface, roofing, framing, siding, flooring, insulation, ...acoustical ceilings, computer-access flooring, metal framing, wall partitions, office furniture systems, and both custom or factory-produced materials, ...trim and molding,... ceiling treatments, ... exposed columns and beams, displays, mantels, staircases...metal studs, metal lath, and drywall..."
Health and safety
United States
Carpentry is often hazardous work. Types of woodworking and carpentry hazards include: machine hazards, flying materials, tool projection, fire and explosion, electrocution, noise, vibration, dust, and chemicals.
In the United States the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) tries to prevent illness, injury, and fire through regulations. However, self-employed workers are not covered by the OSHA act. OSHA claims that "Since 1970, workplace fatalities have been reduced by more than 65 percent and occupational injury and illness rates have declined by 67 percent. At the same time, U.S. employment has almost doubled." The leading cause of overall fatalities, called the "fatal four," are falls, followed by struck by object, electrocution, and caught-in/between. In general construction "employers must provide working conditions that are free of known dangers. Keep floors in work areas in a clean and, so far as possible, dry condition. Select and provide required personal protective equipment at no cost to workers. Train workers about job hazards in a language that they can understand." Examples of how to prevent falls includes placing railings and toe-boards at any floor opening which cannot be well covered and elevated platforms and safety harness and lines, safety nets, stair railings, and handrails.
Safety is not just about the workers on the job site. Carpenters' work needs to meet the requirements in the Life Safety Code such as in stair building and building codes to promote long-term quality and safety for the building occupants.
Types of carpentry
Conservation carpenter works in architectural conservation, known in the U.S. as a "preservation" or "restoration"; a carpenter who works in historic preservation, maintaining structures as they were built or restoring them to that condition.
Cooper, a barrel maker.
Formwork carpenter creates the shuttering and falsework used in concrete construction, and reshores as necessary.
Framer is a carpenter who builds the skeletal structure or wooden framework of buildings, most often in the platform framing method. A framer who specializes in building with timbers and traditional joints rather than studs is known as a timber framer.
Log builder builds structures of stacked horizontal logs with limited joints.
Joiner (a traditional name now rare in North America), is one who does cabinetry, furniture making, fine woodworking, model building, instrument making, parquetry, joinery, or other carpentry where exact joints and minimal margins of error are important. Various types of joinery include:
Cabinetmaker is a carpenter who does fine and detailed work specializing in the making of cabinets made from wood, wardrobes, dressers, storage chests, and other furniture designed for storage.
Finish carpenter (North America), also trim carpenter, specializes in installing millwork ie; molding and trim, (such as door and window casings, mantels, crown mouldings, baseboards), engineered wood panels, wood flooring and other types of ornamental work such as turned or Carved objects. Finish carpenters pick up where framing ends off, including hanging doors and installing cabinets. Finish Carpenters are often referred to colloquially as "millworkers", but this title actually pertains to the creation of moldings on a mill.
Furniture maker is a carpenter who makes standalone furniture such as tables, and chairs.
Luthier is someone who makes or repairs stringed instruments. The word luthier comes from the French word for lute, "luth".
Set carpenter builds and dismantles temporary scenery and sets in film-making, television, and the theater.
Shipwright specializes in fabrication maintenance, repair techniques, and carpentry specific to vessels afloat. When assigned to a ship's crew would they would be known as a "Ship's Carpenter". Such a carpenter patrols the vessel's carpenter's walk to examine the hull for leaks.
Other
Japanese carpentry, daiku is the simple term for carpenter, a Miya-daiku (temple carpenter) performs the work of both architect and builder of shrines and temples, and a sukiya-daiku works on teahouse construction and houses. Sashimono-shi build furniture and tateguya do interior finishing work.
Green carpentry specializes in the use of environmentally friendly, energy-efficient and sustainable sources of building materials for use in construction projects. They also practice building methods that require using less material and material that has the same structural soundness.
Recycled (reclaimed, repurposed) carpentry is carpentry that uses scrap wood and parts of discarded or broken furniture to build new wood products.

Cast iron is a class of iron–carbon alloys with a carbon content of more than 2% and silicon content around 1–3%. Its usefulness derives from its relatively low melting temperature. The alloying elements determine the form in which its carbon appears: white cast iron has its carbon combined into the iron carbide compound cementite, which is very hard, but brittle, as it allows cracks to pass straight through; grey cast iron has graphite flakes which deflect a passing crack and initiate countless new cracks as the material breaks, and ductile cast iron has spherical graphite "nodules" which stop the crack from further progressing.
Carbon (C), ranging from 1.8 to 4% by weight, and silicon (Si), 1–3% by weight, are the main alloying elements of cast iron. Iron alloys with lower carbon content are known as steel.
Cast iron tends to be brittle, except for malleable cast irons. With its relatively low melting point, good fluidity, castability, excellent machinability, resistance to deformation and wear resistance, cast irons have become an engineering material with a wide range of applications and are used in pipes, machines and automotive industry parts, such as cylinder heads, cylinder blocks and gearbox cases. Some alloys are resistant to damage by oxidation. In general, cast iron is notoriously difficult to weld.
The earliest cast-iron artifacts date to the 8th century BC, and were discovered by archaeologists in what is now Jiangsu, China. Cast iron was used in ancient China to mass-produce weaponry for warfare, as well as agriculture and architecture. During the 15th century AD, cast iron was utilized for cannons and shot in Burgundy, France, and in England during the Reformation. The amounts of cast iron used for cannons required large-scale production. The first cast-iron bridge was built during the 1770s by Abraham Darby III, and is known as the Iron Bridge in Shropshire, England. Cast iron was also used in the construction of buildings.
Production
Cast iron is made from pig iron, which is the product of melting iron ore in a blast furnace. Cast iron can be made directly from the molten pig iron or by re-melting pig iron, often along with substantial quantities of iron, steel, limestone, carbon (coke) and taking various steps to remove undesirable contaminants. Phosphorus and sulfur may be burnt out of the molten iron, but this also burns out the carbon, which must be replaced. Depending on the application, carbon and silicon content are adjusted to the desired levels, which may be anywhere from 2–3.5% and 1–3%, respectively. If desired, other elements are then added to the melt before the final form is produced by casting.
Cast iron is sometimes melted in a special type of blast furnace known as a cupola, but in modern applications, it is more often melted in electric induction furnaces or electric arc furnaces. After melting is complete, the molten cast iron is poured into a holding furnace or ladle.
Types
Alloying elements
Cast iron's properties are changed by adding various alloying elements, or alloyants. Next to carbon, silicon is the most important alloyant because it forces carbon out of solution. A low percentage of silicon allows carbon to remain in solution, forming iron carbide and producing white cast iron. A high percentage of silicon forces carbon out of solution, forming graphite and producing grey cast iron. Other alloying agents, manganese, chromium, molybdenum, titanium, and vanadium counteract silicon, and promote the retention of carbon and the formation of those carbides. Nickel and copper increase strength and machinability, but do not change the amount of graphite formed. Carbon as graphite produces a softer iron, reduces shrinkage, lowers strength, and decreases density. Sulfur, largely a contaminant when present, forms iron sulfide, which prevents the formation of graphite and increases hardness. Sulfur makes molten cast iron viscous, which causes defects. To counter the effects of sulfur, manganese is added, because the two form into manganese sulfide instead of iron sulfide. The manganese sulfide is lighter than the melt, so it tends to float out of the melt and into the slag. The amount of manganese required to neutralize sulfur is 1.7 × sulfur content + 0.3%. If more than this amount of manganese is added, then manganese carbide forms, which increases hardness and chilling, except in grey iron, where up to 1% of manganese increases strength and density.
Nickel is one of the most common alloying elements, because it refines the pearlite and graphite structures, improves toughness, and evens out hardness differences between section thicknesses. Chromium is added in small amounts to reduce free graphite, produce chill, and because it is a powerful carbide stabilizer; nickel is often added in conjunction. A small amount of tin can be added as a substitute for 0.5% chromium. Copper is added in the ladle or in the furnace, on the order of 0.5–2.5%, to decrease chill, refine graphite, and increase fluidity. Molybdenum is added on the order of 0.3–1% to increase chill and refine the graphite and pearlite structure; it is often added in conjunction with nickel, copper, and chromium to form high strength irons. Titanium is added as a degasser and deoxidizer, but it also increases fluidity. Vanadium at 0.15–0.5% is added to cast iron to stabilize cementite, increase hardness, and increase resistance to wear and heat. Zirconium at 0.1–0.3% helps to form graphite, deoxidize, and increase fluidity.
In malleable iron melts, bismuth is added at 0.002–0.01% to increase how much silicon can be added. In white iron, boron is added to aid in the production of malleable iron; it also reduces the coarsening effect of bismuth.
Grey cast iron
Grey cast iron is characterised by its graphitic microstructure, which causes fractures of the material to have a grey appearance. It is the most commonly used cast iron and the most widely used cast material based on weight. Most cast irons have a chemical composition of 2.5–4.0% carbon, 1–3% silicon, and the remainder iron. Grey cast iron has less tensile strength and shock resistance than steel, but its compressive strength is comparable to low- and medium-carbon steel. These mechanical properties are controlled by the size and shape of the graphite flakes present in the microstructure and can be characterised according to the guidelines given by the ASTM.
The tribological behavior of structural alloys during sliding friction is strongly influenced by microstructure and phase composition. Austenitic manganese steels and manganese cast irons exhibit complex wear mechanisms associated with strain hardening, plastic deformation of the surface layer and the formation of wear debris during friction. Such materials may develop hardened surface layers during sliding contact, which significantly influences wear resistance and friction stability.
White cast iron
White cast iron displays white fractured surfaces due to the presence of an iron carbide precipitate called cementite. With a lower silicon content (graphitizing agent) and faster cooling rate, the carbon in white cast iron precipitates out of the melt as the metastable phase cementite, Fe3C, rather than graphite. The cementite which precipitates from the melt forms as relatively large particles. As the iron carbide precipitates out, it withdraws carbon from the original melt, moving the mixture toward one that is closer to eutectic, and the remaining phase is the lower iron-carbon austenite (which on cooling might transform to martensite). These eutectic carbides are much too large to provide the benefit of what is called precipitation hardening (as in some steels, where much smaller cementite precipitates might inhibit plastic deformation by impeding the movement of dislocations through the pure iron ferrite matrix). Rather, they increase the bulk hardness of the cast iron simply by virtue of their own very high hardness and their substantial volume fraction, such that the bulk hardness can be approximated by a rule of mixtures. In any case, they offer hardness at the expense of toughness. Since carbide makes up a large fraction of the material, white cast iron could reasonably be classified as a cermet. White iron is too brittle for use in many structural components, but with good hardness and abrasion resistance and relatively low cost, it finds use in such applications as the wear surfaces (impeller and volute) of slurry pumps, shell liners and lifter bars in ball mills and autogenous grinding mills, balls and rings in coal pulverisers.
It is difficult to cool thick castings fast enough to solidify the melt as white cast iron all the way through. However, rapid cooling can be used to solidify a shell of white cast iron, after which the remainder cools more slowly to form a core of grey cast iron. The resulting casting, called a chilled casting, has the benefits of a hard surface with a somewhat tougher interior.
High-chromium white iron alloys allow massive castings (for example, a 10-tonne impeller) to be sand cast, as the chromium reduces cooling rate required to produce carbides through the greater thicknesses of material. Chromium also produces carbides with impressive abrasion resistance. These high-chromium alloys attribute their superior hardness to the presence of chromium carbides. The main form of these carbides are the eutectic or primary M7C3 carbides, where "M" represents iron or chromium and can vary depending on the alloy's composition. The eutectic carbides form as bundles of hollow hexagonal rods and grow perpendicular to the hexagonal basal plane. The hardness of these carbides are within the range of 1500-1800HV.
Malleable cast iron
Malleable iron starts as a white iron casting that is then heat treated for a day or two at about 950 °C (1,740 °F) and then cooled over a day or two. As a result, the carbon in iron carbide transforms into graphite and ferrite plus carbon. The slow process allows the surface tension to form the graphite into spheroidal particles rather than flakes. Due to their lower aspect ratio, the spheroids are relatively short and far from one another, and have a lower cross section vis-a-vis a propagating crack or phonon. They also have blunt boundaries, as opposed to flakes, which alleviates the stress concentration problems found in grey cast iron. In general, the properties of malleable cast iron are more like those of mild steel. There is a limit to how large a part can be cast in malleable iron, as it is made from white cast iron.
Ductile cast iron
Developed in 1948, nodular or ductile cast iron has its graphite in the form of very tiny nodules with the graphite in the form of concentric layers forming the nodules. As a result, the properties of ductile cast iron are that of a spongy steel without the stress concentration effects that flakes of graphite would produce. The carbon percentage present is 3–4% and percentage of silicon is 1.8–2.8%.Tiny amounts of 0.02 to 0.1% magnesium, and only 0.02 to 0.04% cerium added to these alloys slow the growth of graphite precipitates by bonding to the edges of the graphite planes. Along with careful control of other elements and timing, this allows the carbon to separate as spheroidal particles as the material solidifies. The properties are similar to malleable iron, but parts can be cast with larger sections.
Table of comparative qualities of cast irons
History
Cast iron and wrought iron can be produced unintentionally when smelting copper using iron ore as a flux.
The earliest cast-iron artifacts date to the 8th century BC, and were discovered by archaeologists in what is now modern Luhe County, Jiangsu in China during the Warring States period. This is based on an analysis of the artifact's microstructures.
Cast iron can be poured into a mold to create complex shapes that would be difficult or impossible to make with other traditional metalworking techniques. However, because cast iron is comparatively brittle, it is not suitable for purposes where a sharp edge or flexibility is required. It is strong under compression, but not under tension. Cast iron was invented in China in the 8th century BC and poured into molds to make ploughshares and pots as well as weapons and pagodas. Although steel was more desirable, cast iron was cheaper and thus was more commonly used for implements in ancient China, while wrought iron or steel was used for weapons. The Chinese developed a method of annealing cast iron by keeping hot castings in an oxidizing atmosphere for a week or longer in order to burn off some carbon near the surface in order to keep the surface layer from being too brittle.
Deep within the Congo region of the Central African forest, blacksmiths invented sophisticated furnaces capable of high temperatures over 1000 years ago. There are countless examples of welding, soldering, and cast iron created in crucibles and poured into molds. These techniques were employed for the use of composite tools and weapons with cast iron or steel blades and soft, flexible wrought iron interiors. Iron wire was also produced. Numerous testimonies were made by early European missionaries of the Luba people pouring cast iron into molds to make hoes. Metallographic analysis of Luba artifacts also indicates the use of cast iron.
The technology of cast iron was transferred to the West from China. Al-Qazvini in the 13th century and other travellers subsequently noted an iron industry in the Alburz Mountains to the south of the Caspian Sea. This is close to the silk route, thus the use of cast-iron technology being derived from China is conceivable. Upon its introduction to the West in the 15th century it was used for cannon and shot. Henry VIII (reigned 1509–1547) initiated the casting of cannon in England. Soon, English iron workers using blast furnaces developed the technique of producing cast-iron cannons, which, while heavier than the prevailing bronze cannons, were much cheaper and enabled England to arm its navy better.
Cast-iron pots were made at many English blast furnaces at the time. In 1707, Abraham Darby patented a new method of making pots (and kettles) thinner and hence cheaper than those made by traditional methods. This meant that his Coalbrookdale furnaces became dominant as suppliers of pots, an activity in which they were joined in the 1720s and 1730s by a small number of other coke-fired blast furnaces.
Application of the steam engine to power blast bellows (indirectly by pumping water to a waterwheel) in Britain, beginning in 1743 and increasing in the 1750s, was a key factor in increasing the production of cast iron, which surged in the following decades. In addition to overcoming the limitation on water power, the steam-pumped-water powered blast gave higher furnace temperatures which allowed the use of higher lime ratios, enabling the conversion from charcoal (supplies of wood for which were inadequate) to coke.
The ironmasters of the Weald continued producing cast irons until the 1760s, and armament was one of the main uses of irons after the Restoration.
Cast-iron bridges
The use of cast iron for structural purposes began in the late 1770s, when Abraham Darby III built The Iron Bridge, although short beams had already been used, such as in the blast furnaces at Coalbrookdale. Other inventions followed, including one patented by Thomas Paine. Cast-iron bridges became commonplace as the Industrial Revolution gathered pace. Thomas Telford adopted the material for his bridge upstream at Buildwas, and then for Longdon-on-Tern Aqueduct, a canal trough aqueduct at Longdon-on-Tern on the Shrewsbury Canal. It was followed by the Chirk Aqueduct and the Pontcysyllte Aqueduct, both of which remain in use following the recent restorations.
The best way of using cast iron for bridge construction was by using arches, so that all the material is in compression. Cast iron, again like masonry, is very strong in compression. Wrought iron, like most other kinds of iron and indeed like most metals in general, is strong in tension, and also tough – resistant to fracturing. The relationship between wrought iron and cast iron, for structural purposes, may be thought of as analogous to the relationship between wood and stone.
Cast-iron beam bridges were used widely by the early railways, such as the Water Street Bridge in 1830 at the Manchester terminus of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, but problems with its use became all too apparent when a new bridge carrying the Chester and Holyhead Railway across the River Dee in Chester collapsed killing five people in May 1847, less than a year after it was opened. The Dee bridge disaster was caused by excessive loading at the centre of the beam by a passing train, and many similar bridges had to be demolished and rebuilt, often in wrought iron. The bridge had been badly designed, being trussed with wrought iron straps, which were wrongly thought to reinforce the structure. The centres of the beams were put into bending, with the lower edge in tension, where cast iron, like masonry, is very weak.
Nevertheless, cast iron continued to be used in inappropriate structural ways, until the Tay Rail Bridge disaster of 1879 cast serious doubt on the use of the material. Crucial lugs for holding tie bars and struts in the Tay Bridge had been cast integral with the columns, and they failed in the early stages of the accident. In addition, the bolt holes were also cast and not drilled. Thus, because of casting's draft angle, the tension from the tie bars was placed on the hole's edge rather than being spread over the length of the hole. The replacement bridge was built in wrought iron and steel.
Further bridge collapses occurred, however, culminating in the Norwood Junction rail accident of 1891. Thousands of cast-iron rail underbridges were eventually replaced by steel equivalents by 1900 owing to the widespread concern about cast iron under bridges on the rail network in Britain.
Buildings
Cast-iron columns, pioneered in mill buildings, enabled architects to build multi-storey buildings without the enormously thick walls required for masonry buildings of any height. They also opened up floor spaces in factories, and sight lines in churches and auditoriums. By the mid 19th century, cast iron columns were common in warehouse and industrial buildings, combined with wrought or cast iron beams, eventually leading to the development of steel-framed skyscrapers. Cast iron was also used sometimes for decorative facades, especially in the United States, and the Soho district of New York has numerous examples. It was also used occasionally for complete prefabricated buildings, such as the historic Iron Building in Watervliet, New York.
Textile mills
Another important use was in textile mills. The air in the mills contained flammable fibres from the cotton, hemp, or wool being spun. As a result, textile mills had an alarming propensity to burn down. The solution was to build them completely of non-combustible materials, and it was found convenient to provide the building with an iron frame, largely of cast iron, replacing flammable wood. The first such building was at Ditherington in Shrewsbury, Shropshire. Many other warehouses were built using cast-iron columns and beams, although faulty designs, flawed beams or overloading sometimes caused building collapses and structural failures.
During the Industrial Revolution, cast iron was also widely used for frame and other fixed parts of machinery, including spinning and later weaving machines in textile mills. Cast iron became widely used, and many towns had foundries producing industrial and agricultural machinery.

A casting defect is an undesired irregularity in a metal casting process. Some defects can be tolerated while others can be repaired, otherwise they must be eliminated. They are broken down into five main categories: gas porosity, shrinkage defects, mould material defects, pouring metal defects, and metallurgical defects.
Terminology
The terms "defect" and "discontinuity" refer to two specific and separate things in castings. Defects are defined as conditions in a casting that must be corrected or removed, or the casting must be rejected. Discontinuities, also known as "imperfections", are defined as "interruptions in the physical continuity of the casting". Therefore, if the casting is less than perfect, but still useful and in tolerance, the imperfections should be deemed "discontinuities".
Types
There are many types of defects which result from many different causes. Some of the solutions to certain defects can be the cause for another type of defect.
The following defects can occur in sand castings. Most of these also occur in other casting processes.
Shrinkage defects
Shrinkage defects
can occur when standard feed metal is not available to compensate for shrinkage as the thick metal solidifies. Shrinkage defects will have jagged or linear appearance. Shrinkage defects usually occur in either the cope or drag portion of the casting. Shrinkage defects can be split into two different types: open shrinkage defects and closed shrinkage defects. Open shrinkage defects are open to the atmosphere, therefore as the shrinkage cavity forms, air compensates. There are two types of open air defects: pipes and caved surfaces. Pipes form at the surface of the casting and burrow into the casting, while caved surfaces are shallow cavities that form across the surface of the casting.
Closed shrinkage defects, also known as shrinkage porosity, are defects that form within the casting. Isolated pools of liquid form inside solidified metal, which are called hot spots. The shrinkage defect usually forms at the top of the hot spots. They require a nucleation point, so impurities and dissolved gas can induce closed shrinkage defects. The defects are broken up into macroporosity and microporosity (or micro shrinkage), where macroporosity can be seen by the naked eye and microporosity cannot.
Gas porosity
Gas porosity is the formation of bubbles within the casting after it has cooled. This occurs because most liquid materials can hold a large amount of dissolved gas, but the solid form of the same material cannot, so the gas forms bubbles within the material as it cools. Gas porosity may present itself on the surface of the casting as porosity or the pore may be trapped inside the metal, which reduces strength in that vicinity. Nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen are the most encountered gases in cases of gas porosity. In aluminium castings, hydrogen is the only gas that dissolves in significant quantity, which can result in hydrogen gas porosity. For casting that are a few kilograms in weight the pores are usually 0.01 to 0.5 mm (0.0004 to 0.02 in) in size. In larger casting, they can be up to one millimetre (0.04 in) in diameter.
To prevent gas porosity the material may be melted in a vacuum, in an environment of low-solubility gases, such as argon or carbon dioxide, or under a flux that prevents contact with the air. To minimize gas solubility the superheat temperatures can be kept low. Turbulence from pouring the liquid metal into the mould can introduce gases, so the moulds are often streamlined to minimize such turbulence. Other methods include vacuum degassing, gas flushing, or precipitation. Precipitation involves reacting the gas with another element to form a compound that will form a dross that floats to the top. For instance, oxygen can be removed from copper by adding phosphorus; aluminium or silicon can be added to steel to remove oxygen. A third source consists of reactions of the molten metal with grease or other residues in the mould.
Hydrogen is produced by the reaction of the metal with humidity or residual moisture in the mould. Drying the mould can eliminate this source of hydrogen formation.
Gas porosity can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from micro shrinkage because microshrinkage cavities can contain gases as well. In general, microporosities will form if the casting is not properly risered or if a material with a wide solidification range is cast. If neither of these are the case then most likely the porosity is due to gas formation.
Tiny gas bubbles are called porosities, but larger gas bubbles are called blowholes or blisters. Such defects can be caused by air entrained in the melt, steam or smoke from the casting sand, or other gasses from the melt or mould. (Vacuum holes caused by metal shrinkage (see above) may also be loosely referred to as 'blowholes'). Proper foundry practices, including melt preparation and mould design, can reduce the occurrence of these defects. Because they are often surrounded by a skin of sound metal, blowholes may be difficult to detect, requiring harmonic, ultrasonic, magnetic, or X-ray (e.g., industrial CT scanning) analysis.
Pouring metal defects
Pouring metal defects include misruns, cold shuts, and inclusions. A misrun occurs when the liquid metal does not completely fill the mould cavity, leaving an unfilled portion. Cold shuts occur when two fronts of liquid metal do not fuse properly in the mould cavity, leaving a weak spot. Both are caused by either a lack of fluidity in the molten metal or cross-sections that are too narrow. The fluidity can be increased by changing the chemical composition of the metal or by increasing the pouring temperature. Another possible cause is back pressure from improperly vented mould cavities.
Misruns and cold shuts are closely related and both involve the material freezing before it completely fills the mould cavity. These types of defects are serious because the area surrounding the defect is significantly weaker than intended. The castability and viscosity of the material can be important factors with these problems. Fluidity affects the minimum section thickness that can be cast, the maximum length of thin sections, fineness of feasibly cast details, and the accuracy of filling mould extremities. There are various ways of measuring the fluidity of a material, although it usually involves using a standard mould shape and measuring the distance the material flows. Fluidity is affected by the composition of the material, freezing temperature or range, surface tension of oxide films, and, most importantly, the pouring temperature. The higher the pouring temperature, the greater the fluidity; however, excessive temperatures can be detrimental, leading to a reaction between the material and the mould; in casting processes that use a porous mould material the material may even penetrate the mould material.
The point at which the material cannot flow is called the coherency point. The point is difficult to predict in mould design because it is dependent on the solid fraction, the structure of the solidified particles, and the local shear strain rate of the fluid. Usually this value ranges from 0.4 to 0.8.
An inclusion is a metal contamination of dross, if solid, or slag, if liquid. These usually are impurities in the pour metal (generally oxides, less frequently nitrides, carbides, or sulfides), material that is eroded from furnace or ladle linings, or contaminates from the mould. In the specific case of aluminium alloys, it is important to control the concentration of inclusions by measuring them in the liquid aluminium and taking actions to keep them to the required level.
There are a number of ways to reduce the concentration of inclusions. In order to reduce oxide formation the metal can be melted with a flux, in a vacuum, or in an inert atmosphere. Other ingredients can be added to the mixture to cause the dross to float to the top where it can be skimmed off before the metal is poured into the mould. If this is not practical, then a special ladle that pours the metal from the bottom can be used. Another option is to install ceramic filters into the gating system. Otherwise swirl gates can be formed which swirl the liquid metal as it is poured in, forcing the lighter inclusions to the center and keeping them out of the casting. If some of the dross or slag is folded into the molten metal then it becomes an entrainment defect.
Metallurgical defects
There are two defects in this category: hot tears and hot spots. Hot tears, also known as hot cracking, are failures in the casting that occur as the casting cools. This happens because the metal is weak when it is hot and the residual stresses in the material can cause the casting to fail as it cools. Proper mould design prevents this type of defect.
Hot spots are sections of casting which have cooled down more slowly than the surrounding material due to higher volume than its surrounding. This causes abnormal shrinkage in this region, which can lead to porosity and cracks. This type of defect can be avoided by proper cooling practices or by changing the chemical composition of the metal.
Additional methods of minimising hot tears are not overheating the casting material and increasing the temperature of the mould.
Die casting
In die casting the most common defects are misruns and cold shuts. These defects can be caused by cold dies, low metal temperature, dirty metal, lack of venting, or excessive lubricant. Other possible defects are gas porosity, shrinkage porosity, hot tears, and flow marks. Flow marks are marks left on the surface of the casting due to poor gating, sharp corners or excessive lubricant.
Continuous casting
A longitudinal facial crack is a specialized type of defect that only occurs in continuous casting processes. This defect is caused by uneven cooling, both primary cooling and secondary cooling, and includes molten steel qualities, such as the chemical composition being out of specification, cleanliness of the material, and homogeneity.
Sand casting
Sand casting has many defects that can occur due to the mould failing. The mould usually fails because of one of two reasons: the wrong material is used or it is improperly rammed.
The first type is mould erosion, which is the wearing away of the mould as the liquid metal fills the mould. This type of defect usually only occurs in sand castings because most other casting processes have more robust moulds. The castings produced have rough spots and excess material. The moulding sand becomes incorporated into the casting metal and decreases the ductility, fatigue strength, and fracture toughness of the casting. This can be caused by a sand with too little strength or a pouring velocity that is too fast. The pouring velocity can be reduced by redesigning the gating system to use larger runners or multiple gates. A related source of defects are drops, in which part of the moulding sand from the cope drops into the casting while it is still a liquid. This also occurs when the mould is not properly rammed.
The second type of defect is metal penetration, which occurs when the liquid metal penetrates into the moulding sand. This causes a rough surface finish. This is caused by sand particles which are too coarse, lack of mould wash, or pouring temperatures that are too high. An alternative form of metal penetration into the mould known as veining is caused by cracking of the sand.
If the pouring temperature is too high or a sand of low melting point is used then the sand can fuse to the casting. When this happens the surface of the casting produced has a brittle, glassy appearance.
A run out occurs when the liquid metal leaks out of the mould because of a faulty mould or flask.
Scabs are a thin layer of metal that sits proud of the casting. They are easy to remove and always reveal a buckle underneath, which is an indentation in the casting surface. Rattails are similar to buckles, except they are thin line indentations and not associated with scabs. Another similar defect is pulldowns, which are buckles that occur in the cope of sand castings. All of these defects are visual in nature and are no reason to scrap the workpiece. These defects are caused by overly high pouring temperatures or deficiencies of carbonaceous material.
A swell occurs when the mould wall gives way across a whole face, and is caused by an improperly rammed mould.
Burn-on occurs when metallic oxides interact with impurities in silica sands. The result is sand particles embedded in the surface of the finished casting. This defect can be avoided by reducing the temperature of the liquid metal, by using a mould wash, and by using various additives in the sand mixture.

The Catalan forge is a set of technological processes designed to obtain iron by directly reducing the ore—without going through the intermediary of smelting as in a blast furnace—and then shingling the resulting massé. The Catalan forge employs hydraulic power to operate a hammer or trip hammer, and a ventilation system, known as the trompe, is utilized to maintain the furnace's combustion. The term refers to the technology and building where this activity occurs. Despite its name, this type of forge was used extensively from the 17th to the 19th century in mountainous regions such as the Alps, the Massif Central, and the Pyrenees, as well as by the first American settlers.
Origin
Metallurgy has used rich, easily meltable ores for millennia, including compact brown hematites and decomposed, hydrated carbonates. The ores were placed in circular hearths dug into the ground and constructed from clay in a rudimentary manner. These hearths were fueled by charcoal and activated by two leather bellows. The ores were transformed into a malleable mass of iron, known as a "burr," through the application of heat and pressure. This mass was then beaten with hammers to remove slag and impurities. This was the "hand forge," or "flying forge," constructed where the ore was discovered. When the vein was exhausted or charcoal was in short supply, the metallurgists departed from the site and established their operations elsewhere, leaving behind the crucibles and slag heaps. The consumption of charcoal was a significant contributing factor to the deforestation of the Pyrenees, which in turn gave rise to numerous conflicts, including the War of the Maidens.
The hand forge was a ubiquitous primitive tool. It was gradually understood that river mills, which were used for grinding grain or powering sawmills, could also be used for beating metal. The iron mill gradually supplanted the hand forge with two waterwheels, one of which activated the bellows and the other the hammer. The innovation that would become the most distinctive aspect of Catalan forging appeared in Italy during the early 17th century. This innovation, variously known as the "Pyrenees" or the "Alps" in different regions, reached the French Pyrenees around the midway point of the century and subsequently proliferated throughout the Pyrenean region.
Tools and features
The hydraulic trompe
A defining feature of the Catalan forge is the necessity for a relatively elevated head, ranging from 7 to 10 meters. The water is directed into a wooden receptacle, the paicherou, and allowed to flow down a vertical pipe, the shaft. Typically, two shafts are in operation concurrently. The shaft is constructed from a tree trunk bisected and subsequently hollowed out. Subsequently, iron bands are affixed to join the two components. At the upper extremity of the pipe, apertures are created at oblique angles, descending inwards and serving as aspirators. The shaft opening is closed by movable wedges, operated from below, which regulate the water flow. The lower extremity of the shaft culminates in a sizable trapezoidal wooden receptacle designated as the "wind box." The water flows into the wind box, which is directed onto a bench-like structure protected by a stone slab. It then exits the wind box through a sliding door. As the water descends, air is drawn in through the suction tubes, resulting in a mixture of water and air that flows into the box. The pressurized air is then conveyed through a quadrangular duct, designated as the "man or sentinel," and subsequently through a nozzle to the upper portion of the firebox. Consequently, the proboscis offers a permanent and automated solution for the ventilation of the firebox, which can be precisely regulated by varying the flow rate.
Foyer
A further defining characteristic of the Catalan forge is the blowing over a low, open hearth with a trompe. Thus, the Catalan forge differs from the Stückofen, another highly advanced low furnace of the same period, in that the charge filled the latter's chimney.
The foyer is a quadrangular mass of masonry (comprising clay and large stones), measuring 2.5 to 3 meters in length and 0.70 to 0.90 meters in height. One of its sides is inclined at an angle to the ground. The hearth is positioned at the intersection of two walls. The dimensions of the furnace vary depending on the smith and their specific requirements. The base of the furnace, or hearth, is constructed from a single large slab of granite or gneiss. The stones that support and surround the crucible are frequently grindstones or fragments of old millstones, preventing water or humidity accumulation. The wall on the shorter side of the crucible is arched and has an opening through which the nozzle from the windbox can pass.
The crucible, a pivotal component of the Catalan forge, exhibits distinctive inner surfaces. The front face, designated as the "hand," is situated on the left when observing the crucible from a frontal perspective. The left face, which allows the wind to pass through, is called the porges. The posterior aspect of the crucible is the cellar, while the lateral aspect is the ore or contrevent. The basement is constructed of masonry, while the remaining sides are lined with thick iron plates. The latairol is constructed of two plates, separated by a third plate, the restanque, which serves as a fulcrum for the workers' levers, facilitating the lifting of the massé. As mentioned earlier, the plates are affixed to one another by a horizontal crosspiece. This plie is supported by robust structures on either side, frequently comprising substantial stones and an antiquated hammerhead.
Hammer
The hammer utilized to strike the massé represents the primary tool employed by the forge. A hydraulic wheel drives the hammer. The wheel is affixed to a cylindrical wooden axle, with cams protruding from its circumference. The cams are designed to grip the tail of the hammer, which is positioned perpendicularly and movable vertically on an axle. The hammer is elevated until the cam releases its grip and falls back. At this juncture, the subsequent cam advances to initiate a repetition of the process, as mentioned earlier. The anvil, the point at which the hammer headlands, is fitted with a removable metal pile in its center, which can be changed according to the nature of the work in progress. Similarly, the hammerhead is a heavy metal mass, but its lower part—the part that comes into contact with the hammerhead—is also removable. The cadence of the hammer blows is regulated by varying the rate of fall on the wheel.
Layout of the forge
Construction
The forge is situated on a watercourse with an adequate flow rate, sufficient elevation, and convenient accessibility, given the necessity for transporting ore, coal, and finished products, typically by mule. The advent of the horn prompted the relocation or upgrading of existing forges, contingent on their geographical positioning.
The stream is channeled and directed to two paicherous: one feeds the trompe, and the other is the paddlewheel that drives the swift(s). The water flow can be regulated by opening or closing the relevant valves. The interior of the forge consists of multiple sections, one of which is designated for the hammers. The hammer, or malh (actually a swift), is the critical tool used to shape the mass of raw iron (the 'massé'), transforming it into refined bars or its final shape before shipment.
The wind box, strategically situated at the base of the horn, is a crucial component that ensures the furnace's efficiency. A wall through which the tuyere passes separates it from the furnace. The various rooms or compartments are responsible for the reception and distribution of the raw materials, namely ores, coal, and finished iron. Additionally, workers can be allocated a designated area during their designated rest periods.
Staff
In principle, the forge is staffed by a brigade of eight workers.
Four masters are responsible for the following areas: the foyer, the maillé, and two escolas. The foyer is responsible for overseeing the operation of the forge. The maillé, or hammer-maker, is to supervise the iron's mechanical work and the hammer's operationmaillé, or hammer-maker, is to oversee the iron's mechanical work and the hammer's operation. The escolas are responsible for managing the fire and wind.
Four "valets" assist the blacksmiths, crushing the ore with the hammer.
A "garde-forge" procures raw materials, ore, and coal.
A "clerk" is responsible for the oversight of supplies, orders, and accounting.
Production
An iron magnifier weighs approximately 125 kilograms. Consequently, a well-coordinated team can operate the device manually. The production of this magnifying glass requires five hours of shingling and forging before it can be transformed into a marketable iron product.
Geographical distribution
Pyrénées-Orientales
Ariège
Pyrénées-Atlantiques
Andorra
In France, the numerous modest rural metallurgical facilities reliant on the Catalan forge, which had persisted despite the advent and enhancements of blast furnaces, ultimately ceased to exist at the advent of the 20th century, when the Thomas process was perfected. This process was responsible for the remarkable expansion of the Lorraine steel industry. Before the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, the two departments of Meurthe and Moselle collectively produced 1.4% of France's steel output. By 1913, Thomas Steel, produced exclusively in Meurthe-et-Moselle, accounted for 69% of the nation's total steel production. This trend was also accentuated by the significant advancement in transportation methods, which enabled manufactured goods to be delivered to distant locations from their point of production.
The initial American settlers refined the cast iron they produced using the Catalan forge, a relatively simple construction compared to blast furnaces and their associated forges. This process was employed in the southern United States until the mid-nineteenth century.
Disappearance
The growth and subsequent decline of the Catalan forges had a notable influence on the price of charcoal. At the zenith of the process, the price of wood rose considerably: from 1833 to 1842, the cost per quintal increased from 7.50 to 9-10 francs. As production declined, the price also fell. In 1854-1855, it was sold for 8 francs, but by 1868, it was worth only 6.10 francs, and by 1872, it was worth 6.80 francs, despite the high inflation rate.

Cathode copper is copper with a purity of 99.99%, and is commonly produced in the form of rectangular copper plates with "ears" for handling. It is mainly produced via two different methods, one starting with copper oxide minerals and one from copper sulfide minerals. Copper sulfides go through a process of comminution and are then typically separated from gangue (and future tailings) by using froth flotation. The resulting copper concentrate is then smelted to produce anode copper which is then electrorefined to obtain cathode copper. Copper oxides are bleached and then processed with solvent extraction and electrowinning.
Cathode copper is used to produce ingots, billets, cakes and wire rods which are then used to produce copper wire.

The Catskill Charcoal Ovens, near Raton, New Mexico, date from 1892. They were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978.
They are 25 large brick structures which look like beehives, in two groups: 14 about 2.5 miles (4.0 km) west of the Catskill townsite, and 11 about two miles east of the townsite.
Each is about 28 feet (8.5 m) tall, with two 6 feet (1.8 m) arched openings, and 15 inches (0.38 m) thick brick walls.
They are located about 20 miles (32 km) southwest of Trinidad, Colorado and 35 miles (56 km) west of Raton, New Mexico. The Sangre de Cristo Mountains are to their west.

Cellulosic ethanol is ethanol (ethyl alcohol) produced from cellulose (the stringy fiber of a plant) rather than from the plant's seeds or fruit. It can be produced from grasses, wood, algae, or other plants. It is generally discussed for use as a biofuel. The carbon dioxide that plants absorb as they grow offsets some of the carbon dioxide emitted when ethanol made from them is burned, so cellulosic ethanol fuel has the potential to have a lower carbon footprint than fossil fuels.
Interest in cellulosic ethanol is driven by its potential to replace ethanol made from corn or sugarcane. Since these plants are also used for food products, diverting them for ethanol production can cause food prices to rise; cellulose-based sources, on the other hand, generally do not compete with food, since the fibrous parts of plants are mostly inedible to humans. Another potential advantage is the high diversity and abundance of cellulose sources; grasses, trees and algae are found in almost every environment on Earth. Even municipal solid waste components like paper could conceivably be made into ethanol. The main current disadvantage of cellulosic ethanol is its high cost of production, which is more complex and requires more steps than corn-based or sugarcane-based ethanol.
Cellulosic ethanol received significant attention in the 2000s and early 2010s. The United States government in particular funded research into its commercialization and set targets for the proportion of cellulosic ethanol added to vehicle fuel. A large number of new companies specializing in cellulosic ethanol, in addition to many existing companies, invested in pilot-scale production plants. However, the much cheaper manufacturing of grain-based ethanol, along with the low price of oil in the 2010s, meant that cellulosic ethanol was not competitive with these established fuels. As a result, most of the new refineries were closed by the mid-2010s and many of the newly founded companies became insolvent. A few still exist, but are mainly used for demonstration or research purposes; as of 2021, none produces cellulosic ethanol at scale.
Overview
Cellulosic ethanol is a type of biofuel produced from lignocellulose, a structural material that comprises much of the mass of plants and is composed mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. Popular sources of lignocellulose include both agricultural waste products (e.g. corn stover or wood chips) and grasses like switchgrass and miscanthus species. These raw materials for ethanol production have the advantage of being abundant and diverse and would not compete with food production, unlike the more commonly used corn and cane sugars. However, they also require more processing to make the sugar monomers available to the microorganisms typically used to produce ethanol by fermentation, which drives up the price of cellulose-derived ethanol.
Cellulosic ethanol can reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 85% over reformulated gasoline. By contrast, starch ethanol (e.g., from corn), which most frequently uses natural gas to provide energy for the process, may not reduce greenhouse gas emissions at all depending on how the starch-based feedstock is produced. According to the National Academy of Sciences in 2011, there is no commercially viable bio-refinery in existence to convert lignocellulosic biomass to fuel. Absence of production of cellulosic ethanol in the quantities required by the regulation was the basis of a United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia decision announced January 25, 2013, voiding a requirement imposed on car and truck fuel producers in the United States by the Environmental Protection Agency requiring addition of cellulosic biofuels to their products. These issues, along with many other difficult production challenges, led George Washington University policy researchers to state that "in the short term, [cellulosic] ethanol cannot meet the energy security and environmental goals of a gasoline alternative."
History
The French chemist Henri Braconnot was the first to discover that cellulose could be hydrolyzed into sugars by treatment with sulfuric acid in 1819. The hydrolyzed sugar could then be processed to form ethanol through fermentation. The first commercialized ethanol production began in Germany in 1898, where acid was used to hydrolyze cellulose. In the United States, the Standard Alcohol Company opened the first cellulosic ethanol production plant in South Carolina in 1910. Later, a second plant was opened in Louisiana. However, both plants were closed after World War I due to economic reasons.
The first attempt at commercializing a process for ethanol from wood was done in Germany in 1898. It involved the use of dilute acid to hydrolyze the cellulose to glucose, and was able to produce 7.6 liters of ethanol per 100 kg of wood waste (18 US gal (68 L) per ton). The Germans soon developed an industrial process optimized for yields of around 50 US gallons (190 L) per ton of biomass. This process soon found its way to the US, culminating in two commercial plants operating in the southeast during World War I. These plants used what was called "the American Process" — a one-stage dilute sulfuric acid hydrolysis. Though the yields were half that of the original German process (25 US gallons (95 L) of ethanol per ton versus 50), the throughput of the American process was much higher. A drop in lumber production forced the plants to close shortly after the end of World War I. In the meantime, a small but steady amount of research on dilute acid hydrolysis continued at the USFS's Forest Products Laboratory. During World War II, the US again turned to cellulosic ethanol, this time for conversion to butadiene to produce synthetic rubber. The Vulcan Copper and Supply Company was contracted to construct and operate a plant to convert sawdust into ethanol. The plant was based on modifications to the original German Scholler process as developed by the Forest Products Laboratory. This plant achieved an ethanol yield of 50 US gal (190 L) per dry ton, but was still not profitable and was closed after the war.
With the rapid development of enzyme technologies in the last two decades, the acid hydrolysis process has gradually been replaced by enzymatic hydrolysis. Chemical pretreatment of the feedstock is required to hydrolyze (separate) hemicellulose, so it can be more effectively converted into sugars. The dilute acid pretreatment is developed based on the early work on acid hydrolysis of wood at the USFS's Forest Products Laboratory. In 2009, the Forest Products Laboratory together with the University of Wisconsin–Madison developed a sulfite pretreatment to overcome the recalcitrance of lignocellulose for robust enzymatic hydrolysis of wood cellulose.
In his 2007 State of the Union Address on January 23, 2007, US President George W. Bush announced a proposed mandate for 35 billion US gallons (130×10^9 L) of ethanol by 2017. Later that year, the US Department of Energy awarded $385 million in grants aimed at jump-starting ethanol production from nontraditional sources like wood chips, switchgrass, and citrus peels.
Production methods
The stages to produce ethanol using a biological approach are:
A "pretreatment" phase to make the lignocellulosic material such as wood or straw amenable to hydrolysis
Cellulose hydrolysis (cellulolysis) to break down the molecules into sugars
Microbial fermentation of the sugar solution
Distillation and dehydration to produce pure alcohol
In 2010, a genetically engineered yeast strain was developed to produce its own cellulose-digesting enzymes. Assuming this technology can be scaled to industrial levels, it would eliminate one or more steps of cellulolysis, reducing both the time required and costs of production.
Although lignocellulose is the most abundant plant material resource, its usability is curtailed by its rigid structure. As a result, an effective pretreatment is needed to liberate the cellulose from the lignin seal and its crystalline structure so as to render it accessible for a subsequent hydrolysis step. By far, most pretreatments are done through physical or chemical means. To achieve higher efficiency, both physical and chemical pretreatments are required. Physical pretreatment involves reducing biomass particle size by mechanical processing methods such as milling or extrusion. Chemical pretreatment partially depolymerizes the lignocellulose so enzymes can access the cellulose for microbial reactions.
Chemical pretreatment techniques include acid hydrolysis, steam explosion, ammonia fiber expansion, organosolv, sulfite pretreatment, SO2-ethanol-water fractionation, alkaline wet oxidation and ozone pretreatment. Besides effective cellulose liberation, an ideal pretreatment has to minimize the formation of degradation products because they can inhibit the subsequent hydrolysis and fermentation steps. The presence of inhibitors further complicates and increases the cost of ethanol production due to required detoxification steps. For instance, even though acid hydrolysis is probably the oldest and most-studied pretreatment technique, it produces several potent inhibitors including furfural and hydroxymethylfurfural. Ammonia Fiber Expansion (AFEX) is an example of a promising pretreatment that produces no inhibitors.
Most pretreatment processes are not effective when applied to feedstocks with high lignin content, such as forest biomass. These require alternative or specialized approaches. Organosolv, SPORL ('sulfite pretreatment to overcome recalcitrance of lignocellulose') and SO2-ethanol-water (AVAP®) processes are the three processes that can achieve over 90% cellulose conversion for forest biomass, especially those of softwood species. SPORL is the most energy efficient (sugar production per unit energy consumption in pretreatment) and robust process for pretreatment of forest biomass with very low production of fermentation inhibitors. Organosolv pulping is particularly effective for hardwoods and offers easy recovery of a hydrophobic lignin product by dilution and precipitation. AVAP® process effectively fractionates all types of lignocellulosics into clean highly digestible cellulose, undegraded hemicellulose sugars, reactive lignin and lignosulfonates, and is characterized by efficient recovery of chemicals.
Cellulolytic processes
The hydrolysis of cellulose (cellulolysis) produces simple sugars that can be fermented into alcohol. There are two major cellulolysis processes: chemical processes using acids, or enzymatic reactions using cellulases.
Chemical hydrolysis
In the traditional methods developed in the 19th century and at the beginning of the 20th century, hydrolysis is performed by attacking the cellulose with an acid. Dilute acid may be used under high heat and high pressure, or more concentrated acid can be used at lower temperatures and atmospheric pressure. A decrystallized cellulosic mixture of acid and sugars reacts in the presence of water to complete individual sugar molecules (hydrolysis). The product from this hydrolysis is then neutralized and yeast fermentation is used to produce ethanol. As mentioned, a significant obstacle to the dilute acid process is that the hydrolysis is so harsh that toxic degradation products are produced that can interfere with fermentation. BlueFire Renewables uses concentrated acid because it does not produce nearly as many fermentation inhibitors, but must be separated from the sugar stream for recycle [simulated moving bed chromatographic separation, for example] to be commercially attractive.
Agricultural Research Service scientists found they can access and ferment almost all of the remaining sugars in wheat straw. The sugars are located in the plant's cell walls, which are notoriously difficult to break down. To access these sugars, scientists pretreated the wheat straw with alkaline peroxide, and then used specialized enzymes to break down the cell walls. This method produced 93 US gallons (350 L) of ethanol per ton of wheat straw.
Enzymatic hydrolysis
Cellulose chains can be broken into glucose molecules by cellulase enzymes. This reaction occurs at body temperature in the stomachs of ruminants such as cattle and sheep, where the enzymes are produced by microbes. This process uses several enzymes at various stages of this conversion. Using a similar enzymatic system, lignocellulosic materials can be enzymatically hydrolyzed at a relatively mild condition (50 °C and pH 5), thus enabling effective cellulose breakdown without the formation of byproducts that would otherwise inhibit enzyme activity. All major pretreatment methods, including dilute acid, require an enzymatic hydrolysis step to achieve high sugar yield for ethanol fermentation.
Fungal enzymes can be used to hydrolyze cellulose. The raw material (often wood or straw) still has to be pre-treated to make it amenable to hydrolysis. In 2005, Iogen Corporation announced it was developing a process using the fungus Trichoderma reesei to secrete "specially engineered enzymes" for an enzymatic hydrolysis process.
Another Canadian company, SunOpta, uses steam explosion pretreatment, providing its technology to Verenium (formerly Celunol Corporation)'s facility in Jennings, Louisiana, Abengoa's facility in Salamanca, Spain, and a China Resources Alcohol Corporation in Zhaodong. The CRAC production facility uses corn stover as raw material.
Microbial fermentation
Traditionally, baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), has long been used in the brewery industry to produce ethanol from hexoses (six-carbon sugars). Due to the complex nature of the carbohydrates present in lignocellulosic biomass, a significant amount of xylose and arabinose (five-carbon sugars derived from the hemicellulose portion of the lignocellulose) is also present in the hydrolysate. For example, in the hydrolysate of corn stover, approximately 30% of the total fermentable sugars is xylose. As a result, the ability of the fermenting microorganisms to use the whole range of sugars available from the hydrolysate is vital to increase the economic competitiveness of cellulosic ethanol and potentially biobased proteins.
At the turn of the millennium, metabolic engineering for microorganisms used in fuel ethanol production showed significant progress. Besides Saccharomyces cerevisiae, microorganisms such as Zymomonas mobilis and Escherichia coli have been targeted through metabolic engineering for cellulosic ethanol production. An attraction towards alternative fermentation organism is its ability to ferment five carbon sugars improving the yield of the feed stock. This ability is often found in bacteria based organisms.
In the first decade of the 21st century, engineered yeasts have been described efficiently fermenting xylose, and arabinose, and even both together. Yeast cells are especially attractive for cellulosic ethanol processes because they have been used in biotechnology for hundreds of years, are tolerant to high ethanol and inhibitor concentrations and can grow at low pH values to reduce bacterial contamination.
Combined hydrolysis and fermentation
Some species of bacteria have been found capable of direct conversion of a cellulose substrate into ethanol. One example is Clostridium thermocellum, which uses a complex cellulosome to break down cellulose and synthesize ethanol. However, C. thermocellum also produces other products during cellulose metabolism, including acetate and lactate, in addition to ethanol, lowering the efficiency of the process. Some research efforts are directed to optimizing ethanol production by genetically engineering bacteria that focus on the ethanol-producing pathway.
Gasification process (thermochemical approach)
The gasification process does not rely on chemical decomposition of the cellulose chain (cellulolysis). Instead of breaking the cellulose into sugar molecules, the carbon in the raw material is converted into synthesis gas, using what amounts to partial combustion. The carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and hydrogen may then be fed into a special kind of fermenter. Instead of sugar fermentation with yeast, this process uses Clostridium ljungdahlii bacteria. This microorganism will ingest carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and hydrogen and produce ethanol and water. The process can thus be broken into three steps:
Gasification — Complex carbon-based molecules are broken apart to access the carbon as carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and hydrogen
Fermentation — Convert the carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and hydrogen into ethanol using the Clostridium ljungdahlii organism
Distillation — Ethanol is separated from water
A 2002 study has found another Clostridium bacterium that seems to be twice as efficient in making ethanol from carbon monoxide as the one mentioned above.
Alternatively, the synthesis gas from gasification may be fed to a catalytic reactor where it is used to produce ethanol and other higher alcohols through a thermochemical process. This process can also generate other types of liquid fuels, an alternative concept successfully demonstrated by the Montreal-based company Enerkem at their facility in Westbury, Quebec.
Hemicellulose to ethanol
Studies are intensively conducted to develop economic methods to convert both cellulose and hemicellulose to ethanol. Fermentation of glucose, the main product of cellulose hydrolyzate, to ethanol is an already established and efficient technique. However, conversion of xylose, the pentose sugar of hemicellulose hydrolyzate, is a limiting factor, especially in the presence of glucose. Moreover, it cannot be disregarded as hemicellulose will increase the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of cellulosic ethanol production.
Sakamoto (2012) et al. show the potential of genetic engineering microbes to express hemicellulase enzymes. The researchers created a recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain that was able to:
hydrolyze hemicellulase through codisplaying endoxylanase on its cell surface,
assimilate xylose by expression of xylose reductase and xylitol dehydrogenase.
The strain was able to convert rice straw hydrolyzate to ethanol, which contains hemicellulosic components. Moreover, it was able to produce 2.5x more ethanol than the control strain, showing the highly effective process of cell surface-engineering to produce ethanol.
Advantages
General advantages of ethanol fuel
Ethanol burns more cleanly and more efficiently than gasoline. Because plants consume carbon dioxide as they grow, bioethanol has an overall lower carbon footprint than fossil fuels. Substituting ethanol for oil can also reduce a country's dependence on oil imports.
Advantages of cellulosic ethanol over corn or sugar-based ethanol
Commercial production of cellulosic ethanol, which unlike corn and sugarcane would not compete with food production, would be highly attractive since it would alleviate pressure on these foodcrops.
Although its processing costs are higher, the price of cellulose biomass is much cheaper than that of grains or fruits. Moreover, since cellulose is the main component of plants, the whole plant can be harvested, rather than just the fruit or seeds. This results in much better yields; for instance, switchgrass yields twice as much ethanol per acre as corn. Biomass materials for cellulose production require fewer inputs, such as fertilizer, herbicides, and their extensive roots improve soil quality, reduce erosion, and increase nutrient capture. The overall carbon footprint and global warming potential of cellulosic ethanol are considerably lower (see chart) and the net energy output is several times higher than that of corn-based ethanol.
The potential raw material is also plentiful. Around 44% of household waste generated worldwide consists of food and greens. An estimated 323 million tons of cellulose-containing raw materials which could be used to create ethanol are thrown away each year in US alone. This includes 36.8 million dry tons of urban wood wastes, 90.5 million dry tons of primary mill residues, 45 million dry tons of forest residues, and 150.7 million dry tons of corn stover and wheat straw. Moreover, even land marginal for agriculture could be planted with cellulose-producing crops, such as switchgrass, resulting in enough production to substitute for all the current oil imports into the United States.
Paper, cardboard, and packaging comprise around 17% of global household waste; although some of this is recycled. As these products contain cellulose, they are transformable into cellulosic ethanol, which would avoid the production of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, during decomposition.
Disadvantages
General disadvantages
The main overall drawback of ethanol fuel is its lower fuel economy compared to gasoline when using ethanol in an engine designed for gasoline with a lower compression ratio.
Disadvantages of cellulosic ethanol over corn or sugar-based ethanol
The main disadvantage of cellulosic ethanol is its high cost and complexity of production, which has been the main impediment to its commercialization.
Economics
Although the global bioethanol market is sizable (around 110 billion liters in 2019), the vast majority is made from corn or sugarcane, not cellulose. In 2007, the cost of producing ethanol from cellulosic sources was estimated ca. USD 2.65 per gallon (€0.58 per liter), which is around 2–3 times more expensive than ethanol made from corn. However, the cellulosic ethanol market remains relatively small and reliant on government subsidies. The US government originally set cellulosic ethanol targets gradually ramping up from 1 billion liters in 2011 to 60 billion liters in 2022. However, these annual goals have almost always been waived after it became clear there was no chance of meeting them. Most of the plants to produce cellulosic ethanol were canceled or abandoned in the early 2010s. Plants built or financed by DuPont, General Motors and BP, among many others, were closed or sold. As of 2018, only one major plant remains in the US.
In order for it to be grown on a large-scale production, cellulose biomass must compete with existing uses of agricultural land, mainly for the production of crop commodities. Of the United States' 2.26 billion acres (9.1 million km2) of unsubmerged land, 33% are forestland, 26% pastureland and grassland, and 20% crop land. A study by the U.S. Departments of Energy and Agriculture in 2005 suggested that 1.3 billion dry tons of biomass is theoretically available for ethanol use while maintaining an acceptable impact on forestry, agriculture.
Comparison with corn-based ethanol
Currently, cellulose is more difficult and more expensive to process into ethanol than corn or sugarcane. The US Department of Energy estimated in 2007 that it costs about $2.20 per gallon to produce cellulosic ethanol, which is 2–3 times much as ethanol from corn. Enzymes that destroy plant cell wall tissue cost US$0.40 per gallon of ethanol compared to US$0.03 for corn. However, cellulosic biomass is cheaper to produce than corn, because it requires fewer inputs, such as energy, fertilizer, herbicide, and is accompanied by less soil erosion and improved soil fertility. Additionally, nonfermentable and unconverted solids left after making ethanol can be burned to provide the fuel needed to operate the conversion plant and produce electricity. Energy used to run corn-based ethanol plants is derived from coal and natural gas. The Institute for Local Self-Reliance estimates the cost of cellulosic ethanol from the first generation of commercial plants will be in the $1.90–$2.25 per gallon range, excluding incentives. This compares to the current cost of $1.20–$1.50 per gallon for ethanol from corn and the current retail price of over $4.00 per gallon for regular gasoline (which is subsidized and taxed).
Enzyme-cost barrier
Cellulases and hemicellulases used in the production of cellulosic ethanol are more expensive compared to their first generation counterparts. Enzymes required for maize grain ethanol production cost US$ 2.64-5.28 per cubic meter of ethanol produced. Enzymes for cellulosic ethanol production are projected to cost US$ 79.25/m3US$ EtOH, meaning they are 20-40 times more expensive. The cost differences are attributed to quantity required. The cellulase family of enzymes have a one to two order smaller magnitude of efficiency. Therefore, it requires 40 to 100 times more of the enzyme to be present in its production, about 15-25 kilograms of enzyme per ton of biomass (2009 estimate). Enzymes as a result comprise 20-40% of the costs for cellulosic ethanol production. There are also relatively high capital costs associated with the long incubation times for the vessel that perform enzymatic hydrolysis.
A more recent (2016) estimate reports that 10 kg of enzyme can be used per metric ton of dry biomass feedstock. The enzyme cost fraction depends on how (and where) the cellulase enzyme is produced. For enzyme produced off-site, the fraction is 36%; for production on-site in a separate plant, the fraction is 29%; for integrated enzyme production, the fraction is 13%. One of the key benefits of integrated production is that biomass instead of glucose is the used as the growth medium for enzyme production. Biomass costs less than glucose. It also makes the resulting cellulosic ethanol a 100% second-generation biofuel, i.e., it uses no "food for fuel".
Feedstocks
In general there are two types of feedstocks: forest (woody) Biomass and agricultural biomass. In the US, about 1.4 billion dry tons of biomass can be sustainably produced annually.
Forest
About 370 million tons or 30% are forest biomass. Forest biomass has higher cellulose and lignin content and lower hemicellulose and ash content than agricultural biomass. Because of the difficulties and low ethanol yield in fermenting pretreatment hydrolysate, especially those with very high 5 carbon hemicellulose sugars such as xylose, forest biomass has significant advantages over agricultural biomass. Forest biomass also has high density which significantly reduces transportation cost. It can be harvested year around which eliminates long-term storage. The close to zero ash content of forest biomass significantly reduces dead load in transportation and processing. To meet the needs for biodiversity, forest biomass will be an important biomass feedstock supply mix in the future biobased economy. However, forest biomass is much more recalcitrant than agricultural biomass. In 2009, the USDA Forest Products Laboratory together with the University of Wisconsin–Madison developed efficient technologies that can overcome the strong recalcitrance of forest (woody) biomass including those of softwood species that have low xylan content. Short-rotation intensive culture or tree farming can offer an almost unlimited opportunity for forest biomass production.
Woodchips from slashes and tree tops and saw dust from saw mills, and waste paper pulp are forest biomass feedstocks for cellulosic ethanol production.
Agricultural
Agricultural waste
Food production produces waste in the form of inedible lignocellulosic biomass: stover, sugarcane bagasse, straw, etc. Being lignocellulosic, a majority of their mass is cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Their nature as waste has led to sustained interest in converting them into useful materials including bioethanol.
DuPont's Nevada pilot plant for converting corn stover to bioethanol ended in failure. The German company Verbio purchased the plant with a goal to convert it to biomethane production.
Switchgrass
Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) is a native tallgrass prairie grass. Known for its hardiness and rapid growth, this perennial grows during the warm months to heights of 2–6 feet. Switchgrass can be grown in most parts of the United States, including swamplands, plains, streams, and along the shores & interstate highways. It is self-seeding (no tractor for sowing, only for mowing), resistant to many diseases and pests, & can produce high yields with low applications of fertilizer and other chemicals. It is also tolerant to poor soils, flooding, & drought; improves soil quality and prevents erosion due its type of root system.
Switchgrass is an approved cover crop for land protected under the federal Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). CRP is a government program that pays producers a fee for not growing crops on land on which crops recently grew. This program reduces soil erosion, enhances water quality, and increases wildlife habitat. CRP land serves as a habitat for upland game, such as pheasants and ducks, and a number of insects. Switchgrass for biofuel production has been considered for use on Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) land, which could increase ecological sustainability and lower the cost of the CRP program. However, CRP rules would have to be modified to allow this economic use of the CRP land.
Giant miscanthus
Miscanthus × giganteus is another viable feedstock for cellulosic ethanol production. This species of grass is native to Asia and is a sterile hybrid of Miscanthus sinensis and Miscanthus sacchariflorus. It has high crop yields, is cheap to grow, and thrives in a variety of climates. However, because it is sterile, it also requires vegetative propagation, making it more expensive.
Other candidates
It was suggested in 1999 that Kudzu may become a valuable source of biomass.
Cellulosic ethanol commercialization
Fueled by subsidies and grants, a boom in cellulosic ethanol research and pilot plants occurred in the early 2000s. Companies such as Iogen, POET, and Abengoa built refineries that can process biomass and turn it into ethanol, while companies such as DuPont, Diversa, Novozymes, and Dyadic invested in enzyme research. However, most of these plants were canceled or closed in the early 2010s as technical obstacles proved too difficult to overcome. As of 2018, only one cellulosic ethanol plant remained operational.
In the later 2010s, various companies occasionally attempted smaller-scale efforts at commercializing cellulosic ethanol, although such ventures generally remain at experimental scales and often dependent on subsidies. The companies Granbio, Raízen and the Centro de Tecnologia Canavieira each run a pilot-scale facility operate in Brazil, which together produce around 30 million liters in 2019. Iogen, which started as an enzyme maker in 1991 and re-oriented itself to focus primarily on cellulosic ethanol in 2013, owns many patents for cellulosic ethanol production and provided the technology for the Raízen plant. Other companies developing cellulosic ethanol technology as of 2021 are Inbicon (Denmark); companies operating or planning pilot production plants include New Energy Blue (US), Sekab (Sweden) and Clariant (in Romania). Abengoa, a Spanish company with cellulosic ethanol assets, became insolvent in 2021. Clariant exited the field in 2023.
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency, along with state and local governments, partially funded a pilot plant in 2017 and 2020 in New South Wales as part of efforts to diversify the regional economy away from coal mining.
US Government support
From 2006, the US Federal government began promoting the development of ethanol from cellulosic feedstocks. In May 2008, Congress passed a new farm bill that contained funding for the commercialization of second-generation biofuels, including cellulosic ethanol. The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 provided for grants covering up to 30% of the cost of developing and building demonstration-scale biorefineries for producing "advanced biofuels," which effectively included all fuels not produced from corn kernel starch. It also allowed for loan guarantees of up to $250 million for building commercial-scale biorefineries.
In January 2011, the USDA approved $405 million in loan guarantees through the 2008 Farm Bill to support the commercialization of cellulosic ethanol at three facilities owned by Coskata, Enerkem and INEOS New Planet BioEnergy. The projects represent a combined 73 million US gallons (280,000 m3) per year production capacity and will begin producing cellulosic ethanol in 2012. The USDA also released a list of advanced biofuel producers who will receive payments to expand the production of advanced biofuels. In July 2011, the US Department of Energy gave in $105 million in loan guarantees to POET for a commercial-scale plant to be built Emmetsburg, Iowa.

In archaeology, a celt is a long, thin, prehistoric, stone or bronze tool similar to an adze, hoe, or axe.
A shoe-last celt was a polished stone tool used during the early European Neolithic for felling trees and woodworking.
Etymology
The term "celt" seems to have come about from a copyist's error in many medieval manuscript copies of Job 19:24 in the Latin Vulgate Bible, which became enshrined in the authoritative Sixto-Clementine printed edition of 1592. Where all earlier versions (the Codex Amiatinus, for example) have vel certe (the Latin for 'but surely'), the Sixto-Clementine has vel celte. The Hebrew has לעד (lā‘aḏ) at this point, which means 'forever'. The editors of the Oxford English Dictionary "[incline] to the belief that celtis was a phantom word", simply a misspelling of certe. However, some scholars over the years have treated celtis as a real Latin word.
From the context of Job 19:24 ("Oh, that my words were inscribed with an iron tool on lead, or engraved in rock forever!"), the Latin word celte was assumed to be some kind of ancient chisel. Eighteenth-century antiquarians, such as Lorenz Beger, adopted the word for the stone and bronze tools they were finding at prehistoric sites; the OED suggests that a "fancied etymological connexion" with the prehistoric Celts assisted its passage into common use.

Cementite (or iron carbide) is a compound of iron and carbon, more precisely an intermediate transition metal carbide with the formula Fe3C. By weight, it is 6.67% carbon and 93.3% iron. It has an orthorhombic crystal structure. It is a hard, brittle material, normally classified as a ceramic in its pure form, and is a frequently found and important constituent in ferrous metallurgy. While cementite is present in most steels and cast irons, it is produced as a raw material in the iron carbide process, which belongs to the family of alternative ironmaking technologies. The name cementite originated from the theory of Floris Osmond and J. Werth, in which the structure of solidified steel consists of a kind of cellular tissue, with ferrite as the nucleus and Fe3C the envelope of the cells. The carbide therefore cemented the iron.
Metallurgy
In the iron–carbon system (i.e. plain-carbon steels and cast irons) it is a common constituent because ferrite can contain at most 0.02wt% of uncombined carbon. Therefore, in carbon steels and cast irons that are slowly cooled, a portion of the carbon is in the form of cementite. Cementite forms directly from the melt in the case of white cast iron. In carbon steel, cementite precipitates from austenite as austenite transforms to ferrite on slow cooling, or from martensite during tempering. An intimate mixture with ferrite, the other product of austenite, forms a lamellar structure called pearlite.
While cementite is thermodynamically unstable, eventually being converted to austenite (low carbon level) and graphite (high carbon level) at higher temperatures, it does not decompose on heating at temperatures below the eutectoid temperature (723 °C) on the metastable iron-carbon phase diagram.
Mechanical properties are as follows: room temperature microhardness 760–1350 HV; bending strength 4.6–8 GPa, Young's modulus 160–180 GPa, indentation fracture toughness 1.5–2.7 MPa√m.
The morphology of cementite plays a critical role in the kinetics of phase transformations in steel. The coiling temperature and cooling rate significantly affect cementite formation. At lower coiling temperatures, cementite forms fine pearlitic colonies, whereas at higher temperatures, it precipitates as coarse particles at grain boundaries. This morphological difference influences the rate of austenite formation and decomposition, with fine cementite promoting faster transformations due to its increased surface area and the proximity of the carbide-ferrite interface. Furthermore, the dissolution kinetics of cementite during annealing are slower for coarse carbides, impacting the microstructural evolution during heat treatments.
Pure form
Cementite changes from ferromagnetic to paramagnetic upon heating to its Curie temperature of approximately 480 K (207 °C).
A natural iron carbide (containing minor amounts of nickel and cobalt) occurs in iron meteorites and is called cohenite after the German mineralogist Emil Cohen, who first described it.
Other iron carbides
There are other forms of metastable iron carbides that have been identified in tempered steel and in the industrial Fischer–Tropsch process. These include epsilon (ε) carbide, hexagonal close-packed Fe2–3C, precipitates in plain-carbon steels of carbon content > 0.2%, tempered at 100–200 °C. Non-stoichiometric ε-carbide dissolves above ~200 °C, where Hägg carbides and cementite begin to form. Hägg carbide, monoclinic Fe5C2, precipitates in hardened tool steels tempered at 200–300 °C. It has also been found naturally as the mineral Edscottite in the Wedderburn meteorite.

Ceramography is the art and science of preparation, examination and evaluation of ceramic microstructures. Ceramography can be thought of as the metallography of ceramics. The microstructure is the structure level of approximately 0.1 to 100 μm, between the minimum wavelength of visible light and the resolution limit of the naked eye. The microstructure includes most grains, secondary phases, grain boundaries, pores, micro-cracks and hardness microindentations. Most bulk mechanical, optical, thermal, electrical and magnetic properties are significantly affected by the microstructure. The fabrication method and process conditions are generally indicated by the microstructure. The root cause of many ceramic failures is evident in the microstructure. Ceramography is part of the broader field of materialography, which includes all the microscopic techniques of material analysis, such as metallography, petrography and plastography. Ceramography is usually reserved for high-performance ceramics for industrial applications, such as 85–99.9% alumina (Al2O3) in Fig. 1, zirconia (ZrO2), silicon carbide (SiC), silicon nitride (Si3N4), and ceramic-matrix composites. It is seldom used on whiteware ceramics such as sanitaryware, wall tiles and dishware.
History
Ceramography evolved along with other branches of materialography and ceramic engineering. Alois de Widmanstätten of Austria etched a meteorite in 1808 to reveal proeutectoid ferrite bands that grew on prior austenite grain boundaries. Geologist Henry Clifton Sorby, the "father of metallography", applied petrographic techniques to the steel industry in the 1860s in Sheffield, England. French geologist Auguste Michel-Lévy devised a chart that correlated the optical properties of minerals to their transmitted color and thickness in the 1880s. Swedish metallurgist J.A. Brinell invented the first quantitative hardness scale in 1900. Smith and Sandland developed the first microindentation hardness test at Vickers Ltd. in London in 1922. Swiss-born microscopist A.I. Buehler started the first metallographic equipment manufacturer near Chicago in 1936. Frederick Knoop and colleagues at the National Bureau of Standards developed a less-penetrating (than Vickers) microindentation test in 1939. Struers A/S of Copenhagen introduced the electrolytic polisher to metallography in 1943. George Kehl of Columbia University wrote a book that was considered the bible of materialography until the 1980s. Kehl co-founded a group within the Atomic Energy Commission that became the International Metallographic Society in 1967.
Preparation of ceramographic specimens
The preparation of ceramic specimens for microstructural analysis consists of five broad steps: sawing, embedding, grinding, polishing and etching. The tools and consumables for ceramographic preparation are available worldwide from metallography equipment vendors and laboratory supply companies.
Sawing
Most ceramics are extremely hard and must be wet-sawed with a circular blade embedded with diamond particles. A metallography or lapidary saw equipped with a low-density diamond blade is usually suitable. The blade must be cooled by a continuous liquid spray.
Embedding
To facilitate further preparation, the sawed specimen is usually embedded (or mounted or encapsulated) in a plastic disc, 25, 32 or 38 mm in diameter. A thermosetting solid resin, activated by heat and compression, e.g. mineral-filled epoxy, is best for most applications. A castable (liquid) resin such as unfilled epoxy, acrylic or polyester may be used for porous refractory ceramics or microelectronic devices. The castable resins are also available with fluorescent dyes that aid in fluorescence microscopy. The left and right specimens in Fig. 3 were embedded in mineral-filled epoxy. The center refractory in Fig. 3 was embedded in castable, transparent acrylic.
Grinding
Grinding is abrasion of the surface of interest by abrasive particles, usually diamond, that are bonded to paper or a metal disc. Grinding erases saw marks, coarsely smooths the surface, and removes stock to a desired depth. A typical grinding sequence for ceramics is one minute on a 240-grit metal-bonded diamond wheel rotating at 240 rpm and lubricated by flowing water, followed by a similar treatment on a 400-grit wheel. The specimen is washed in an ultrasonic bath after each step.
Polishing
Polishing is abrasion by free abrasives that are suspended in a lubricant and can roll or slide between the specimen and paper. Polishing erases grinding marks and smooths the specimen to a mirror-like finish. Polishing on a bare metallic platen is called lapping. A typical polishing sequence for ceramics is 5–10 minutes each on 15-, 6- and 1-μm diamond paste or slurry on napless paper rotating at 240 rpm. The specimen is again washed in an ultrasonic bath after each step. The three sets of specimens in Fig. 3 have been sawed, embedded, ground and polished.
Etching
Etching reveals and delineates grain boundaries and other microstructural features that are not apparent on the as-polished surface. The two most common types of etching in ceramography are selective chemical corrosion, and a thermal treatment that causes relief. As an example, alumina can be chemically etched by immersion in boiling concentrated phosphoric acid for 30–60 s, or thermally etched in a furnace for 20–40 min at 1,500 °C (2,730 °F) in air. The plastic encapsulation must be removed before thermal etching. The alumina in Fig. 1 was thermally etched.
Alternatively, non-cubic ceramics can be prepared as thin sections, also known as petrography, for examination by polarized transmitted light microscopy. In this technique, the specimen is sawed to ~1 mm thick, glued to a microscope slide, and ground or sawed (e.g., by microtome) to a thickness (x) approaching 30 μm. A cover slip is glued onto the exposed surface. The adhesives, such as epoxy or Canada balsam resin, must have approximately the same refractive index (η ≈ 1.54) as glass. Most ceramics have a very small absorption coefficient (α ≈ 0.5 cm −1 for alumina in Fig. 2) in the Beer–Lambert law below, and can be viewed in transmitted light. Cubic ceramics, e.g. yttria-stabilized zirconia and spinel, have the same refractive index in all crystallographic directions and appear, therefore, black when the microscope's polarizer is 90° out of phase with its analyzer.
I
t
I
0
e
−
α
x
{\displaystyle I_{t}=I_{0}e^{-\alpha x}}
(Beer–Lambert eqn)
Ceramographic specimens are electrical insulators in most cases, and must be coated with a conductive ~10-nm layer of metal or carbon for electron microscopy, after polishing and etching. Gold or Au-Pd alloy from a sputter coater or evaporative coater also improves the reflection of visible light from the polished surface under a microscope, by the Fresnel formula below. Bare alumina (η ≈ 1.77, k ≈ 10 −6) has a negligible extinction coefficient and reflects only 8% of the incident light from the microscope, as in Fig. 1. Gold-coated (η ≈ 0.82, k ≈ 1.59 @ λ = 500 nm) alumina reflects 44% in air, 39% in immersion oil.
R
I
r
I
i
(
η
1
−
η
2
)
2
+
k
2
(
η
1
+
η
2
)
2
+
k
2
{\displaystyle R={\frac {I_{r}}{I_{i}}}={\frac {(\eta _{1}-\eta _{2})^{2}+k^{2}}{(\eta _{1}+\eta _{2})^{2}+k^{2}}}}
(Fresnel eqn)..
Ceramographic analysis
Ceramic microstructures are most often analyzed by reflected visible-light microscopy in brightfield. Darkfield is used in limited circumstances, e.g., to reveal cracks. Polarized transmitted light is used with thin sections, where the contrast between grains comes from birefringence. Very fine microstructures may require the higher magnification and resolution of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) or confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM). The cathodoluminescence microscope (CLM) is useful for distinguishing phases of refractories. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) and scanning acoustic microscope (SAM) have specialty applications in ceramography.
Ceramography is often done qualitatively, for comparison of the microstructure of a component to a standard for quality control or failure analysis purposes. Three common quantitative analyses of microstructures are grain size, second-phase content and porosity. Microstructures are measured by the principles of stereology, in which three-dimensional objects are evaluated in 2-D by projections or cross-sections. Microstructures exhibiting heterogeneous grain sizes, with certain grains growing very large, occur in diverse ceramic systems and this phenomenon is known as abnormal grain growth or AGG. The occurrence of AGG has consequences, positive or negative, on mechanical and chemical properties of ceramics and its identification is often the goal of ceramographic analysis.
Grain size can be measured by the line-fraction or area-fraction methods of ASTM E112. In the line-fraction methods, a statistical grain size is calculated from the number of grains or grain boundaries intersecting a line of known length or circle of known circumference. In the area-fraction method, the grain size is calculated from the number of grains inside a known area. In each case, the measurement is affected by secondary phases, porosity, preferred orientation, exponential distribution of sizes, and non-equiaxed grains. Image analysis can measure the shape factors of individual grains by ASTM E1382.
Second-phase content and porosity are measured the same way in a microstructure, such as ASTM E562. Procedure E562 is a point-fraction method based on the stereological principle of point fraction = volume fraction, i.e., Pp = Vv. Second-phase content in ceramics, such as carbide whiskers in an oxide matrix, is usually expressed as a mass fraction. Volume fractions can be converted to mass fractions if the density of each phase is known. Image analysis can measure porosity, pore-size distribution and volume fractions of secondary phases by ASTM E1245. Porosity measurements do not require etching. Multi-phase microstructures do not require etching if the contrast between phases is adequate, as is usually the case.
Grain size, porosity and second-phase content have all been correlated with ceramic properties such as mechanical strength σ by the Hall–Petch equation. Hardness, toughness, dielectric constant and many other properties are microstructure-dependent.
Microindentation hardness and toughness
The hardness of a material can be measured in many ways. The Knoop hardness test, a method of microindentation hardness, is the most reproducible for dense ceramics. The Vickers hardness test and superficial Rockwell scales (e.g., 45N) can also be used, but tend to cause more surface damage than Knoop. The Brinell test is suitable for ductile metals, but not ceramics. In the Knoop test, a diamond indenter in the shape of an elongated pyramid is forced into a polished (but not etched) surface under a predetermined load, typically 500 or 1000 g. The load is held for some amount of time, say 10 s, and the indenter is retracted. The indention long diagonal (d, μm, in Fig. 4) is measured under a microscope, and the Knoop hardness (HK) is calculated from the load (P, g) and the square of the diagonal length in the equations below. The constants account for the projected area of the indenter and unit conversion factors. Most oxide ceramics have a Knoop hardness in the range of 1000–1500 kgf/mm2 (10 – 15 GPa), and many carbides are over 2000 (20 GPa). The method is specified in ASTM C849, C1326 & E384. Microindentation hardness is also called microindentation hardness or simply microhardness. The hardness of very small particles and thin films of ceramics, on the order of 100 nm, can be measured by nanoindentation methods that use a Berkovich indenter.
H
K
14229
P
d
2
{\displaystyle HK=14229{\frac {P}{d^{2}}}}
(kgf/mm2) and
H
K
139.54
P
d
2
{\displaystyle HK=139.54{\frac {P}{d^{2}}}}
(GPa)
The toughness of ceramics can be determined from a Vickers test under a load of 10 – 20 kg. Toughness is the ability of a material to resist crack propagation. Several calculations have been formulated from the load (P), elastic modulus (E), microindentation hardness (H), crack length (c in Fig. 5) and flexural strength (σ). Modulus of rupture (MOR) bars with a rectangular cross-section are indented in three places on a polished surface. The bars are loaded in 4-point bending with the polished, indented surface in tension, until fracture. The fracture normally originates at one of the indentions. The crack lengths are measured under a microscope. The toughness of most ceramics is 2–4 MPa√m, but toughened zirconia is as much as 13, and cemented carbides are often over 20. The toughness-by-indention methods have been discredited recently and are being replaced by more rigorous methods that measure crack growth in a notched beam in bending.
K
i
c
l
0.016
E
H
P
(
c
0
)
1.5
{\displaystyle K_{icl}=0.016{\sqrt {\frac {E}{H}}}{\frac {P}{(c_{0})^{1.5}}}}
initial crack length
K
i
s
b
0.59
(
E
H
)
1
/
8
[
σ
(
P
1
/
3
)
]
3
/
4
{\displaystyle K_{isb}=0.59\left({\frac {E}{H}}\right)^{1/8}[\sigma (P^{1/3})]^{3/4}}
indention strength in bending

Certosina is a decorative art technique of inlaying used widely in the Italian Renaissance period. Similar to marquetry, it uses small pieces of wood, bone, ivory, metal, or mother-of-pearl to create inlaid geometric patterns on a wood base. The term comes from Carthusian monasteries (Certosa in Italian, Charterhouse in English), probably the Certosa di Pavia, where the technique was used in ornamenting an altarpiece by the Embriachi workshop.

A chafery is a variety of hearth used in ironmaking for reheating a bloom of iron, in the course of its being drawn out into a bar of wrought iron.
The equivalent term for a bloomery was string hearth, except in 17th century Cumbria, where the terminology was that of the finery forge.
A finery forge for the Walloon process would typically have one chafery to work two fineries (but sometimes one or three fineries).
Chaferies were also used in the potting and stamping forges of the Industrial Revolution.

Chalcedony is an aggregate of cryptocrystalline or microcrystalline silica, or in simpler terms, a mass of individual silica crystals that are too small to be seen without magnification. It is composed primarily of quartz, with minor amounts of intergrown moganite. These are both silica minerals with a chemical composition of SiO2, but they differ in that quartz has a more symmetrical crystal structure (trigonal) than moganite (monoclinic). Mineralogically speaking, the quartz and moganite crystals in chalcedony must grow in parallel chains, called "fibers." However, the term chalcedony may more broadly refer to any microcrystalline or cryptocrystalline silica, fibrous or not.
Chalcedony has a waxy luster, and may be semitransparent or translucent. It can assume a wide range of colors, but those most commonly seen are white to gray, grayish-blue or a shade of brown ranging from pale to nearly black. The color of chalcedony sold commercially is often enhanced by dyeing or heating.
Etymology
The name chalcedony comes from the Latin chalcedonius (alternatively spelled calchedonius) and is probably derived from the town of Chalcedon in Asia Minor. According to the Online Etymology Dictionary, however, a connection with the town of Chalcedon is "very doubtful". The name appears in Pliny the Elder's Naturalis Historia as a term for a translucent kind of jaspis.
Another reference to a gem by the name of khalkedón (χαλκηδών) is found in the Book of Revelation (21:19); however, it is a hapax legomenon, found nowhere else in the Bible, so it is hard to tell whether the precious gem mentioned in Revelation is the same as the mineral known by this name today. The term plasma is sometimes used to refer to green translucent chalcedony.
Composition
Chalcedony is an aggregate of microscopic (microcrystalline) or submicroscopic (cryptocrystalline) silica crystals. The mineral species of silica present in chalcedony is typically quartz, although a percentage may be moganite, a quartz polymorph. The existence of moganite was once regarded as dubious, but it is now officially recognized by the International Mineralogical Association.
All forms of silica, including quartz and moganite, have a chemical composition of SiO2. They differ in that quartz has greater symmetry, crystallizing in the trigonal crystal system while moganite crystallizes in the monoclinic crystal system. Over geological time, the metastable moganite is recrystallized as quartz.
Unlike macroscopic (macrocrystalline) quartz, which is anhydrous, chalcedony normally contains very small amounts of water.
Structure
In mineralogical literature, chalcedony refers strictly to fibrous microcrystalline or cryptocrystalline quartz. Chalcedony fibers are twisted along their length, giving them a helical shape. Individual fibers in agates were determined by X-ray diffraction to be 0.1-1.0 µm in diameter and up to several millimeters long.
There are two distinct types of chalcedony fibers. Length-fast chalcedony fibers consist of crystals stacked perpendicular to the c-axis (side to side). These crystals are intergrown, polysynthetic twins according to Brazil law. Length-slow chalcedony, also known as quartzine, consists of quartz crystals stacked parallel to the c-axis (tip to tip).
Properties
Solubility
Chalcedony is more soluble than quartz under low-temperature conditions, despite the two minerals being chemically identical. Possible reasons include the existence of the moganite component, defects caused by Brazil twinning, and small crystal size.
Varieties
Chalcedony occurs in a wide range of varieties. Many semi-precious gemstones are in fact forms of chalcedony. The more notable varieties of chalcedony are as follows:
Agate
Agate is a fibrous, banded variety of chalcedony that occurs in a variety of colors and patterns. Iris agate shows exceptional iridescence when light (especially pinpointed light) is shone through the stone.
Carnelian
Carnelian (also spelled cornelian) is a clear-to-translucent reddish-brown variety of chalcedony. Its hue may vary from a pale orange to an intense almost-black coloration. Similar to carnelian is sard, which is brown rather than red.
Chert
Chrysoprase
Chrysoprase (also spelled chrysophrase) is a green variety of chalcedony, which has been colored by nickel oxide. (The darker varieties of chrysoprase are also referred to as prase. However, the term prase is also used to describe green quartz and to a certain extent is a color-descriptor, rather than a rigorously defined mineral variety.)
Fire agate
Fire agate is a variety of chalcedony with inclusions of goethite or limonite causing an iridescent effect. It can display a wide range of iridescent colors including red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and purple.
Flint
Heliotrope
Heliotrope is a green variety of chalcedony, containing red inclusions of iron oxide that resemble drops of blood, giving heliotrope its alternative name of bloodstone. In a similar variety known as plasma, the spots are yellow instead.
Jasper
Moss agate
Moss agate contains green filament-like inclusions, giving it the superficial appearance of moss or blue cheese. There is also tree agate which is similar to moss agate except it is solid white with green filaments whereas moss agate usually has a transparent background, so the "moss" appears in 3D. It is not a true form of agate, as it lacks agate's defining feature of concentric banding.
Chrome chalcedony
Chrome chalcedony is a green variety of chalcedony, which is colored by chromium compounds. It is also known as "mtorolite" when found in Zimbabwe and "chiquitanita" when found in Bolivia.
Onyx
Onyx is a variant of agate with black and white banding. Similarly, agate with brown, orange, red and white banding is known as sardonyx.
Petrified wood
Turritella agate
History
Chalcedony was used in tool making as early as c. 32,000 BP in Central Australia where archaeological studies at sites in the Cleland Hills uncovered flakes from stone brought in from quarries many kilometres away. Pre-contact uses described in the twentieth century included ceremonial stone knives.
Chalcedony was used for green and yellow color in prehistoric cave paintings, for example at the Bhimbetka rock shelters. The chalcedony was ground to powder form then mixed with water and animal fat or tree resin or gum.
In the Bronze Age chalcedony was in use in the Mediterranean region; for example, on Minoan Crete at the Palace of Knossos, chalcedony seals have been recovered dating to circa 1800 BC. People living along the Central Asian trade routes used various forms of chalcedony, including carnelian, to carve intaglios, ring bezels (the upper faceted portion of a gem projecting from the ring setting), and beads that show strong Greco-Roman influence.
Fine examples of first century objects made from chalcedony, possibly Kushan, were found in recent years at Tillya-tepe in north-western Afghanistan. Hot wax would not stick to it so it was often used to make seal impressions.
The term chalcedony is derived from the name of the ancient Greek town Chalkedon in Asia Minor, in modern English usually spelled Chalcedon, today the Kadıköy district of Istanbul.
According to tradition, at least three varieties of chalcedony were used in the Jewish High Priest's Breastplate. (Jewish tradition states that Moses' brother Aaron wore the Breastplate, with inscribed gems representing the twelve tribes of Israel.) The Breastplate supposedly included jasper, chrysoprase and sardonyx, and there is some debate as to whether other agates were also used.

In architecture and joinery, the chambranle is the border, frame, or ornament, made of stone or wood, that is a component of the three sides round chamber doors, large windows, and chimneys.
When a chambranle is plain and without mouldings, it is called a band, case, or frame. The chambranle consists of three parts; the two sides, called montants, or ports, and the top, called the traverse or supercilium. The chambranle of an ordinary door is frequently called a doorcase; of a window, window frame; and of a chimney, manteltree.
History
In ancient architecture, antepagmenta were garnishings in posts or doors, wrought in stone or timber, or lintels of a window. The word comes from Latin and has been borrowed in English to be used for the entire chambranle, i.e. the door case, or window frame.

A chamfer ( SHAM-fər, CHAM-) is a transitional edge between two faces of an object. Sometimes defined as a form of bevel, it is often created at a 45° angle between two adjoining right-angled faces.
Chamfers are frequently used in machining, carpentry, furniture, concrete formwork, mirrors, and to facilitate assembly of many mechanical engineering designs.
Terminology
In materials and manufacturing, a chamfer is used to "ease" otherwise sharp edges, both for safety and to prevent damage to the edges; it may also be a primarily decorative feature. In general terms it may be regarded as a type of bevel, and the terms are often used interchangeably. However, in machining, only the term "chamfer" is used for the specific technique, practice, and result.
In carpentry, a lark's tongue is a chamfer which ends short of the end of a piece in a gradual outward curve, leaving the remainder of the edge as a right angle. Chamfers may be formed in either inside or outside adjoining faces of an object or room.
Alternatively, a fillet (pronounced , like "fill it") is the rounding-off of an interior corner, and a round (or radius) the rounding of an outside one. A broad radius is known as a bullnose.
Carpentry and furniture
Chamfers are widely used in carpentry, added both for safety and decorative effect to counters and furniture such as table tops. Special tools such as chamfer mills, chamfer planes, an chamfer bits in shapers and routers are sometimes used to ease edges.
Architecture
Chamfers are commonly used in architecture, both for functional and aesthetic reasons. For example, the base of the Taj Mahal is a cube with chamfered corners, thereby creating an octagonal architectural footprint. Its great gate is formed of chamfered base stones and chamfered corbels for a balcony or equivalent cornice towards the roof.
Urban planning
Many city blocks in Barcelona, Valencia and various other cities in Spain, as well as Taichung, and street corners (curbs) in Ponce, Puerto Rico, are chamfered. The chamfering was designed as an embellishment and a modernization of urban space in Barcelona's mid-19th century Eixample or Expansion District, where the buildings follow the chamfering of the sidewalks and streets. This pioneering design opens up broader perspectives, provides pleasant pedestrian areas and allows for greater visibility while turning. It might also be considered to allow for turning to be somewhat more comfortable as, supposedly, drivers would not need to slow down as much when making a turn as they would have to if the corner were a square 90 degrees, although, in Barcelona, most chamfered corners are used as parking spaces or loading–unloading zones, leaving the traffic to run as in normal 90-degree street corners.
Mechanical engineering
Chamfers are frequently used to facilitate assembly of parts which are designed for interference fit or to aid assembly for parts inserted by hand. Resilient materials such as fluid power seals generally require a shallower angle than 45 degrees, often 20. In assemblies, chamfers are also used to clear an interior radius - perhaps from a cutting tool, or to clear other features, such as a weld bead, on an adjoining part. This is because it is generally easier to manufacture and much easier to precisely check the dimensions of a chamfer than a radius, and errors in the profile of either radius could otherwise cause interference between the radii before the flat surfaces make contact with one another.
Chamfers are also essential for components which humans will handle, to prevent injuries, and also to prevent damage to other components. This is particularly important for hard materials, like most metals, and for heavy assemblies, like press tools.
Additionally, a chamfered edge is much more resistant than a square edge to being bruised by other edges or corners knocking against it during assembly or disassembly, or maintenance.
Machining
In machining a chamfer is a slope cut at any right-angled edge of a workpiece, e.g. holes; the ends of rods, bolts, and pins; the corners of the long-edges of plates; any other place where two surfaces meet at a sharp angle. Chamfering eases assembly, e.g. the insertion of bolts into holes, or nuts. Chamfering also removes sharp edges which reduces significantly the possibility of cuts, and injuries, to people handling the metal piece. It also minimizes the introduction of rust, by eliminating the area where a ferrous material is at its thinnest and most vulnerable.
Optical mirror design
Outside of aesthetics, chamfering is part of the process of hand-crafting a parabolic glass telescope mirror. Before the surface of the disc can be ground, the edges must first be chamfered to prevent edge chipping. This can be accomplished by placing the disc in a metal bowl containing silicon carbide and rotating the disc with a rocking motion. The grit will thus wear off the sharp edge of the glass.

Charcoal is a lightweight black carbon residue produced by strongly heating wood (or other animal and plant materials) in minimal oxygen to remove all water and volatile constituents. In the traditional version of this pyrolysis process, called charcoal burning, often by forming a charcoal kiln, the heat is supplied by burning part of the starting material itself, with a limited supply of oxygen. The material can also be heated in a closed retort. Modern charcoal briquettes used for outdoor cooking may contain many other additives, e.g. coal.
The early history of wood charcoal production spans ancient times, rooted in the abundance of wood in various regions. The process typically involves stacking wood billets to form a conical pile, allowing air to enter through openings at the bottom, and igniting the pile gradually. Charcoal burners, skilled professionals tasked with managing the delicate operation, often lived in isolation to tend their wood piles. Throughout history, the extensive production of charcoal has been a significant contributor to deforestation, particularly in regions like Central Europe. However, various management practices, such as coppicing, aimed to maintain a steady supply of wood for charcoal production. The scarcity of easily accessible wood resources eventually led to the transition to fossil fuel equivalents like coal.
Modern methods of charcoal production involve carbonizing wood in retorts, yielding higher efficiencies compared to traditional kilning methods. The properties of charcoal depend on factors such as the material charred and the temperature of carbonization.
Charcoal finds diverse applications, including metallurgical fuel in iron and steel production, industrial fuel, cooking and heating fuel, reducing agent in chemical processes, and as a raw material in pyrotechnics. It is also utilized in cosmetics, horticulture, animal husbandry, medicine using activated charcoal, and environmental sustainability efforts, such as carbon sequestration.
However, the production and utilization of charcoal can have adverse environmental impacts, including deforestation and emissions. Illegal and unregulated charcoal production, particularly in regions like South America and Africa, poses significant challenges to environmental conservation efforts.
History
Charcoal pile
The production of wood charcoal in locations where there is an abundance of wood dates back to ancient times. It generally began with piling billets of wood on their ends to form a conical pile. Openings were left at the bottom to admit air, with a central shaft serving as a flue. The whole pile was covered with turf or moistened clay. The firing began at the bottom of the flue, and the fire gradually spread outward and upward.
The traditional method in Britain used a charcoal pile or clamp. This was essentially a pile of wooden logs (e.g. seasoned oak) leaning in a circle against a chimney. The chimney consisted of 4 wooden stakes held up by some rope. In the clamp too the logs were completely covered with soil and straw allowing no air to enter. It must be lit by introducing some burning fuel into the chimney. The logs burned slowly and transformed into charcoal over a period of 5 days. If the soil covering became torn or cracked by the fire, additional soil was placed on the cracks. Once the burn was complete, the chimney was plugged to prevent air from entering.
Charcoal burners
The true art of this production method was in managing the sufficient generation of heat, by combusting part of the wood material, and the transfer of the heat to the wood in the process of being carbonized. The operation was so delicate that it was generally left to colliers (professional charcoal burners). They often lived alone in small huts to tend their wood piles. For example, in the Harz Mountains of Germany, charcoal burners lived in conical huts called Köten which still exist today.
Low efficiency and harmful emissions
The success of the operation depends upon the rate of the combustion. Under average conditions wood yields about 60% charcoal by volume, or 25% by weight; small-scale production methods often yield only about 50% by volume, while large-scale methods enabled higher yields of about 90% by the 17th century. A strong disadvantage of this production method is the huge amount of emissions that are harmful to human health and the environment (emissions of unburnt methane). As a result of the partial combustion of wood material, the efficiency of the traditional method is low.
Peak of production and decline
Deforestation and scarcity
The massive production of charcoal (at its height employing hundreds of thousands, mainly in Alpine and neighbouring forests) was a major cause of deforestation, especially in Central Europe. Complaints (as early as the Stuart period) about shortages may stem from over-exploitation or the impossibility of increasing production to match growing demand. In England, many woods were managed as coppices, which were cut and regrown cyclically, so that a steady supply of charcoal was available. But the increasing scarcity of easily harvested wood was a major factor behind the switch to fossil fuel equivalents, mainly coal and brown coal for industrial use.
By-product of wood tar production
In Finland and Scandinavia, charcoal was considered the by-product of wood tar production. The best tar came from pine, thus pinewoods were cut down for tar pyrolysis. The residual charcoal was widely used as substitute for metallurgical coke in blast furnaces for smelting. Tar production led to rapid local deforestation. The end of tar production at the end of the 19th century resulted in rapid re-forestation of affected areas.
Charcoal briquette
The American form of the charcoal briquette was first invented and patented by Ellsworth B. A. Zwoyer of Pennsylvania in 1897 and was produced by the Zwoyer Fuel Company. The process was further popularized by Henry Ford, who used wood and sawdust byproducts from automobile fabrication as a feedstock. Ford Charcoal went on to become the Kingsford Company.
Production methods
The modern process of carbonizing wood, either in small pieces or as sawdust in cast iron retorts, is extensively practiced where wood is scarce, and also for the recovery of valuable byproducts (wood spirit, pyroligneous acid, wood tar), which the process permits. The question of the temperature of the carbonization is important; according to J. Percy, wood becomes brown at 220 °C (430 °F), a deep brown-black after some time at 280 °C (540 °F), and an easily powdered mass at 310 °C (590 °F). Charcoal made at 300 °C (570 °F) is brown, soft and friable, and readily inflames at 380 °C (720 °F); made at higher temperatures it is hard and brittle, and does not fire until heated to about 700 °C (1,300 °F).
Modern methods employ retorting technology, in which process heat is recovered from, and solely provided by, the combustion of gas released during carbonization. Yields of retorting are considerably higher than those of kilning, and may reach 35%-40%.
The properties of the charcoal produced depend on the material charred. The charring temperature is also important. Charcoal contains varying amounts of hydrogen and oxygen as well as ash and other impurities that, together with the structure, determine the properties. The approximate composition of charcoal for gunpowders is sometimes empirically described as C7H4O. To obtain a coal with high purity, source material should be free of non-volatile compounds.
Wood charcoal is obtained as the residue by destructive distillation of wood such that the products are:
Liquid products – pyroligneous acid and wood tar
Gaseous products – wood gas
Residual product – wood charcoal
Types
Common charcoal is made from peat, coal, wood, coconut shell, or petroleum.
Sugar charcoal is obtained from the carbonization of sugar and is particularly pure. It is purified by boiling with acids to remove any mineral matter and is then burned for a long time in a current of chlorine to remove the last traces of hydrogen. It was used by Henri Moissan in his early attempt to create synthetic diamonds.
Activated charcoal is similar to common charcoal but is manufactured especially for medical use. To produce activated charcoal, common charcoal is heated to about 900 °C (1,700 °F) in the presence of an inert gas (usually argon or nitrogen), causing the charcoal to develop many internal spaces, or "pores", which help the activated charcoal to trap chemicals. Impurities on the surface of the charcoal are also removed during this process, greatly increasing its adsorption capacity.
Lump charcoal is a traditional charcoal made directly from hardwood material. It usually produces far less ash than briquettes.
Japanese charcoal has had pyroligneous acid removed during the charcoal making; it therefore produces almost no smell or smoke when burned. The traditional charcoal of Japan is classified into three types:
White charcoal (Binchōtan) is hard and produces a metallic sound when struck.
Black charcoal
Ogatan is a more recent type made from hardened sawdust.
Pillow shaped briquettes are made by compressing charcoal, typically made from sawdust and other wood by-products, with a binder and other additives. The binder is usually starch. Briquettes may also include brown coal (heat source), mineral carbon (heat source), borax, sodium nitrate (ignition aid), limestone (ash-whitening agent), raw sawdust (ignition aid), and other additives.
Sawdust briquette charcoal is made by compressing sawdust without binders or additives. It is the preferred charcoal in Taiwan, Korea, Greece, and the Middle East. It has a round hole through the center, with a hexagonal cross-section. It is used primarily for barbecue as it produces no odor, no smoke, little ash, high heat, and has a long burning time (exceeding 4 hours).
Extruded charcoal is made by extruding either raw ground wood or carbonized wood into logs without the use of a binder. The heat and pressure of the extruding process hold the charcoal together. If the extrusion is made from raw wood material, the extruded logs are subsequently carbonized.
Uses
Charcoal has been used since earliest times for a large range of purposes including art and medicine, but by far its most important use has been as a metallurgical fuel. Charcoal is the traditional fuel of a blacksmith's forge and other applications where an intense heat is required. Charcoal was also used historically as a source of black pigment by grinding it up. In this form charcoal was important to early chemists and was a constituent of formulas for mixtures such as black powder. Due to its high surface area, charcoal can be used as a filter, catalyst, or adsorbent.
Metallurgical fuel
Charcoal burns at temperatures exceeding 1,100 degrees Celsius (2,010 degrees Fahrenheit). By comparison, the melting point of iron is approximately 1,200 to 1,550 °C (2,190 to 2,820 °F). Due to its porosity, it is sensitive to the flow of air and the heat generated can be moderated by controlling the air flow to the fire. For this reason charcoal is still widely used by blacksmiths. Charcoal has been used for the production of iron and steel (where it also provided the necessary carbon) since at least 2000 BCE, with artifacts having been found in Proto-Hittite layers at Kaman-Kalehöyük. Charcoal briquettes can burn up to approximately 1,260 °C (2,300 °F) with a forced air blower forge.
In the 16th century, England had to pass laws to prevent the country from becoming completely denuded of trees due to production of iron. In the 19th century charcoal was largely replaced by coke in steel production due to cost, even though coke usually adds sulphur and sometimes other deleterious contaminants to the pig iron. Wooded metallurgical regions devoid of coal like Sweden, the Urals, or Siberia transitioned from charcoal in the early 20th century.
Cooking and heating fuel
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, charcoal was occasionally used as a cooking fuel. It is counted as a smokeless fuel; that is, the carbon is sufficiently pure that burning it causes substantially less air pollution than burning the original uncarbonized organic material would. In the 20th century, clean-air legislation mandated smokeless fuels (mostly coke or charcoal) in many areas of Europe. In the 21st century, charcoal has been advocated as a way to improve the health of people burning raw biomass for cooking and/or heating. Modern "charcoal" briquettes, widely used for outdoor cooking, are made with charcoal but may also include coal as an energy source as well as accelerants, binders and filler.
To contain the charcoal and use it for cooking purposes, a barbecue grill may be used. A small Japanese charcoal grill is known as a shichirin. A brazier is a container used to burn charcoal or other solid fuel.
To start the charcoal burning is harder than starting a wood fire and charcoal lighter fluid may be employed. A chimney starter or electric charcoal starter are tools to help with starting to light charcoal.
Approximately 75% of fuel burned in Haiti is charcoal.
Reducing agent
Certain types of charcoal, such as wood charcoal, are used in carbothermic reactions to reduce heated metallic oxides to their respective metals. For example:
ZnO + C → Zn + CO
Fe2O3 + 3C → 2Fe + 3CO
Charcoal can also be in gasification used to reduce super heated steam to hydrogen (along with the formation of carbon monoxide). For example:
C + H2O (1000 °C) → H2 + CO (Water gas)
Syngas production, automotive fuel
Like many other sources of carbon, charcoal can be used for the production of various syngas compositions; i.e., various CO + H2 + CO2 + N2 mixtures. The syngas is typically used as fuel, including automotive propulsion, or as a chemical feedstock.
In times of scarce petroleum, automobiles and even buses have been converted to burn wood gas: a gas mixture consisting primarily of diluting atmospheric nitrogen, but also containing combustible gasses (mostly carbon monoxide) released by burning charcoal or wood in a wood gas generator. In 1931, Tang Zhongming developed an automobile powered by charcoal, and these cars were popular in China until the 1950s, and in occupied France during World War II, where they were called gazogènes.
Pyrotechnics
Charcoal is used in the production of black powder, which is used extensively in the production of fireworks. It is usually ground into a fine powder, with air float grade being the finest particle size available commercially. When used in black powder compositions, it is often ball-milled with other ingredients so that they are intimately mixed together. Certain charcoals perform better when used to make black powder; these include spruce, willow, paulownia and grapevine among others. Charcoal produces fine dark orange/golden sparks. Usually, powder with a mesh size from 10 to 325 is used to obtain showers of golden sparks in pyrotechnic compositions.
Cosmetic use of bamboo charcoal
Charcoal is also incorporated in multiple cosmetic products. It can be produced from regular bamboo cut into small pieces and boiled in water to remove soluble compounds. Raw bamboo charcoal is obtained after drying and carbonization in an oven at elevated temperature. The role of charcoal in cosmetics is based on its highly effective absorbing properties at a microscopic scale.
Carbon source
Charcoal may be used as a source of carbon in chemical reactions. One example of this is the production of carbon disulphide through the reaction of sulfur vapors with hot charcoal. In that case, the wood should be charred at high temperature to reduce the residual amounts of hydrogen and oxygen that lead to side reactions.
Purification and filtration
Charcoal may be activated to increase its effectiveness as a filter. Activated charcoal readily adsorbs a wide range of organic compounds dissolved or suspended in gases and liquids. In certain industrial processes, such as the purification of sucrose from cane sugar, impurities cause an undesirable color, which can be removed with activated charcoal. It is also used to absorb odors and toxins in gaseous solutions, as in home air purifiers and some types of gas mask. The medical use of activated charcoal is mainly the absorption of poisons. Activated charcoal is available without a prescription, so it is used for a variety of health-related applications. For example, it is often used to reduce discomfort and embarrassment due to excessive gas (flatulence) in the digestive tract.
Animal charcoal or bone black is the carbonaceous residue obtained by the dry distillation of bones. It contains only about 10% carbon, the remaining being calcium and magnesium phosphates (80%) and other inorganic material originally present in the bones. It is generally manufactured from the residues obtained in the glue and gelatin industries. Its bleaching power was applied in 1812 by Derosne for clarifying sugar syrup, but its use in this direction has now greatly diminished. Today it is seldom used for this purpose due to the introduction of more active and easily managed reagents, but it is still employed to some extent in laboratory practice. The bleaching action of the charcoal in solution diminishes as it adsorbs colored contaminants, and it must be reactivated periodically by separate washing and reheating. While wood charcoal effectively removes some pigments and contaminants from solutions, bone charcoal is generally more effective as an adsorption filter due to its increased porosity and surface area.
Medicine
Charcoal in the form of charcoal biscuits was consumed in the past for gastric problems. It can be consumed in tablet, capsule, or powder form for digestive effects. Research regarding its effectiveness is controversial. It is usually used in poison control by neutralizing toxins.
Charcoal has been used in combination with saccharin in research to measure mucociliary transport time.
Charcoal has also been incorporated into toothpaste formulas; however, there is no evidence to determine its safety and effectiveness.
Red colobus monkeys in Africa have been observed eating charcoal for self-medication. Because their leafy diets contain high levels of cyanide, which may lead to indigestion, they learned to consume charcoal, which absorbs the cyanide and relieves discomfort. This knowledge is transmitted from mother to infant.
Art
Charcoal is used for drawing, making rough sketches in painting, and is one of the possible media used for making a parsemage. It usually must be preserved by the application of a fixative. Artists generally utilize charcoal in four forms:
Vine charcoal is created by burning grapevines.
Willow charcoal is created by burning willow sticks.
Powdered charcoal is often used to "tone" or cover large sections of a drawing surface. Drawing over the toned areas darkens it further, but the artist can also lighten (or completely erase) within the toned area to create lighter tones.
Compressed charcoal is charcoal powder mixed with gum binder and compressed into sticks. The amount of binder determines the hardness of the stick. Compressed charcoal is used in charcoal pencils.
Horticulture
One additional use of charcoal was rediscovered recently for horticulture. Although American gardeners have used charcoal for a short time, research on Terra preta soils in Amazonia has discovered the widespread use of biochar by pre-Columbian natives to ameliorate unproductive soil into soil rich in carbon. The technique may find modern application, both to improve soils and as a means of carbon sequestration.
Animal husbandry
Charcoal is mixed with feed, added to litter, or used in the treatment of manure. Poultry benefits from using charcoal in this manner.
A concern that activated charcoal might be used unscrupulously to allow livestock to tolerate low quality feed contaminated with aflatoxins resulted in the Association of American Feed Control Officials banning it in 2012 from use in commercial livestock feeds.
Environmental impact
Production and use of charcoal, like any use of woody biomass as fuel, typically results in emissions and can contribute to deforestation.
The use of charcoal as a smelting fuel has been experiencing a resurgence in South America resulting in severe environmental, social and medical problems. Charcoal production at a sub-industrial level is one of the causes of deforestation. Charcoal production is now usually illegal and nearly always unregulated, as in Brazil, where charcoal production is a large illegal industry for making pig iron.
Massive forest destruction has been documented in areas such as Virunga National Park in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where it is considered a primary threat to the survival of the mountain gorillas. Similar threats are found in Zambia. In Malawi, illegal charcoal trade employs 92,800 workers and is the main source of heat and cooking fuel for 90 percent of the nation's population. Some experts, such as Duncan MacQueen, Principal Researcher–Forest Team, International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), argue that while illegal charcoal production causes deforestation, a regulated charcoal industry that required replanting and sustainable use of the forests "would give their people clean efficient energy – and their energy industries a strong competitive advantage".
Assessments of charcoal imported to Europe have shown that many charcoal products are produced from tropical wood, often of undeclared origin. In an analysis of barbecue charcoal marketed in Germany, the World Wildlife Fund found that most products contain tropical wood. As a notable exception, reference is made to barbecue charcoal imports from Namibia, where charcoal is typically produced from surplus biomass resulting from woody plant encroachment. Charcoal trafficking in Somalia is an economic and environmental issue with significant regional-security implications.
In popular culture
The last section of the film Le Quattro Volte (2010) gives a good and long, if poetic, documentation of the traditional method of making charcoal. The Arthur Ransome children's series Swallows and Amazons (particularly the second book, Swallowdale) features carefully drawn vignettes of the lives and the techniques of charcoal burners at the start of the 20th century, in the Lake District of the UK. Antonín Dvořák's opera King and Charcoal Burner is based on a Czech legend about a king who gets lost in a forest and is rescued by a charcoal burner. In Kingdom Come: Deliverance videogame charcoal burning landscapes, structures, and workers of 15th-century Bohemia are widely depicted.

Artists' charcoal is charcoal used as a dry art medium. Both compressed charcoal (held together by a gum or wax binder) and charcoal sticks (wooden sticks burned in a kiln without air) are used. The marks it leaves behind on paper are much less permanent than with other media such as graphite, and so lines can easily be erased and blended. Charcoal can produce lines that are very light or intensely black. The dry medium can be applied to almost any surface from smooth to very coarse. Fixatives are used with charcoal drawings to solidify the position to prevent erasing or rubbing off of charcoal dusts.
The method used to create artists' charcoal is similar to that employed in other fields, such as producing gunpowder and cooking fuel. The type of wood material and preparation method allow a variety of charcoal types and textures to be produced.
Types
There are various types and uses of charcoal as an art medium, but the commonly used types are: Compressed, Vine, and Pencil.
Vine charcoal is a long and thin charcoal stick that is the result of burning grape vines in a kiln without air. It comes in shades of gray.
Willow charcoal is a long and thin charcoal stick that is the result of burning willow sticks in a kiln without air. It is darker in color than vine charcoal.
The removable properties of willow and vine charcoal, through dusting and erasing, are favored by artists for making preliminary sketches or basic compositions. This also makes such charcoal less suitable for creating detailed images.
Compressed charcoal (also referred as charcoal sticks) is shaped into a block or a stick. Intensity of the shade is determined by hardness. The amount of gum or wax binders used during the production process affects the hardness, softer producing intensely black markings while firmer leaves light markings.
Charcoal pencils consist of compressed charcoal enclosed in a jacket of wood. Designed to be similar to graphite pencils while maintaining most of the properties of charcoal, they are often used for fine and crisp detailed drawings, while keeping the user's hand from being marked.
Other types of artists' charcoal such as charcoal crayons were developed during the 19th century and used by caricaturists. Charcoal powders are used to create patterns and pouncing, a transferring method of patterns from one surface to another.
There are wide variations in artists' charcoal, depending on the proportion of ingredients: compressed charcoal from burned birch, clay, lamp black pigment, and a small quantity of ultramarine. The longer this mixture is heated, the softer it becomes.
Art techniques
Paper used with artists' charcoal can vary in quality. Rough texture may allow more charcoal to adhere to the paper. The use of toned paper allows different possibilities as white oil pastels (commonly referred to by the brand name Conté) can be used in combination with charcoal to create contrast.
Hatching
Hatching is a method in which thin, dark lines are continuously placed parallel to each-other.
When done with charcoal, it comes out smoother and darker.
Rubbing
Rubbing is done by pressing a sheet of paper against a targeted surface, then rubbing charcoal against the paper to create an image of the texture of the surface.
Blending
Blending is done to create smooth transitions between darker and lighter areas of a drawing. It can also create a shadow effect. Two common methods of blending are, using a finger to rub or spread charcoal which has been applied to the paper or the use of paper blending stumps also called a Tortillon. Many prefer to use a chamois, which is a soft square piece of leather.
Lifting (erasing)
Erasing is often performed with a kneaded rubber eraser. This is a malleable eraser that is often claimed to be self-cleaning. It can be shaped by kneading it softly with hands, into tips for smaller areas or flipped inside out to clean. Other erasing tools that are often used with charcoal are electrical erasers and pencil erasers.
History
Charcoal was often a key component of cave painting, with examples dating back to at least 28,000 years ago.
One of the oldest charcoal paintings is a picture of a zebra, found at the Apollo cave in Namibia.
In the Renaissance, charcoal was widely used, but few works of art survived due to charcoal particles flaking off the canvas. At the end of the 15th century, a process of submerging the drawings in a gum bath was implemented to prevent the charcoal from flaking away. Charcoal paintings date as far back as ca.23,000 BC. Since then, many cultures have utilized charcoal for art, camouflage, and in rites of passage. Many indigenous people from Australia, parts of Africa, Pacific Islands, parts of Asia, and others still practice body painting for rites of passage including child birth, weddings, spiritual rituals, war, hunting, and funerary rites. Many artists use charcoal because of its unique dark black strokes. The weak structure of charcoal causes the material to flake off onto the canvas.
Throughout western art history, artists well known for other mediums have used charcoal for sketching or preliminary studies for final paintings. Examples of contemporary artists using charcoal as a primary medium are Robert Longo, William Kentridge, Dan Pyle and Joel Daniel Phillips.
Gallery

The Charcoal Kilns near Eureka, Utah were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979. The listing included two charcoal kilns that each are about six feet in diameter and four feet deep, built out of stone. They are believed to have been built or used to support the Wyoming Smelter in 1871.

A charcoal biscuit is a biscuit based on a powdered willow charcoal or activated carbon mixed with ordinary flour, and made into dough with butter, sugar and eggs.
History
Charcoal biscuits were first made in England in the early 19th century as an antidote to flatulence and stomach trouble. The Retrospect of Practical Medicine and Surgery, a medical text published in 1856, recommends charcoal biscuits for gastric problems, saying each biscuit contained ten grains (648 mg) of charcoal. Vegetable Charcoal: Its Medicinal and Economic Properties with Practical Remarks on Its Use in Chronic Affections of the Stomach and Bowels, published in 1857, recommends charcoal biscuits as an excellent method of administering charcoal to children.
Contemporary forms
In modern times charcoal biscuits are made in the form of crackers to accompany cheeses. The biscuits have a slight hint of charcoal taste that is described by some as pleasing. The biscuits have also been marketed as a pet care product to control flatulence in pets, and as aids to digestion or stomach problems in humans.
Cultural references
In Brideshead Revisited, Evelyn Waugh writes of Charles Ryder consuming charcoal biscuits and iced coffee while cramming for exams at Oxford. Ludwig Wittgenstein is said to have eaten very little else while staying in Ireland.
Several of Terry Pratchett's Discworld books mention charcoal biscuits. In Hogfather they are a restorative for the God of Indigestion. In Reaper Man, they are implicated in the explosive death of Mustrum Ridcully's uncle. In Men At Arms, they are a treat for a small dragon, and in Guards! Guards! another small dragon in danger of being flamed by a much larger dragon looks "as though he might be turned into a small flying charcoal biscuit".
In August 2012, charcoal biscuits were featured in the dessert round of an episode of the Chopped: Grillmasters tournament on Food Network.

A charcoal burner is someone whose occupation is to manufacture charcoal. Traditionally this is achieved by carbonising wood in a charcoal pile or kiln. Charcoal burning is one of the oldest human crafts.
History and technique
Medieval charcoal burners
Since the Iron Age, high temperatures have had to be produced for iron smelting, for glassmaking, and for the working of precious metals. Charcoal has been used to do this for centuries and, in order to produce it, entire forests were felled. With the increasing use of stone coal from the 18th century, the charcoal burning industry declined.
Even in ancient times, charcoal was manufactured in kilns. Logs were arranged in a conical heap (a charcoal kiln or pile) around posts, a fire shaft was made using brushwood and wood chips and covered with an airtight layer of grass, moss and earth. The pile was ignited inside the firing shaft and, at a temperature of between 300 and 350 °C, the carbonization process began. The process took six to eight days - in large kilns several weeks - during which time the charcoal burner had to control the draught (by piercing small holes and resealing them), being careful neither to allow the pile to go out nor let it go up in flames. By observing the smoke exiting the kiln, the charcoal burner could assess the state of the carbonization process. If the smoke was thick and gray, the wood was still raw; thin, blue smoke indicated good carbonization.
In earlier times, charcoal burners led an austere, lonely life. They had to live near the kiln, usually in a charcoal burner's hut (Köhlerhütte or Köte in Germany, Austria and Switzerland). During the Middle Ages, charcoal burners were ostracised. Their profession was considered dishonourable and they were frequently accused of evil practices. Even today there is a certain denigration of this former occupation. In the German language to have a charcoal burner's faith (Köhlerglauben) is to have blind faith in something. That aside, the continuing requirement to keep the kiln at the right temperature in all weathers meant that the job must have been arduous, lonely and, at times, dangerous.
Modern
Charcoal burning is still carried out commercially in parts of the world. It is rare in Europe, but still practised in Romania, Poland, the UK, Slovenia, and Switzerland. Other places where it is still common are the tropical rain forests of South America and Africa.
Even in the 20th century, charcoal burners in remote areas like the Harz Mountains and the Thuringian Forest, still used a illebille, a large contraption of beechwood boards, used as alarm and signal device. This is commemorated in the name of a mountain ridge in the Harz, called Hillebille. Today the tradition of this old craft is mainly preserved in clubs and societies. These include the European Charcoal Burners' Society (Europäische Köhlerverein) and the Glasofen Charcoal Burners' Society (Köhlerverein Glasofen). In 2014, charcoal burning and tar distilling were incorporated into the register of the Intangible Cultural Heritage in Germany by the Kultusministerkonferenz.
In popular culture
Saint Alexander of Comana (died c. 251) is known as "the charcoal burner". He is said to have taken up the job of the charcoal burner to avoid worldly acclaim.
A. A. Milne's poem "The Charcoal Burner" appeared in Now We Are Six, a collection of verse. It begins:
The Charcoal Burner has tales to tell.
He lives in the forest,
alone in the forest;
he sits in the forest,
alone in the forest.
And the sun comes slanting between the trees
In Swedish children's author Maria Gripe's Hugo and Josephine trilogy (the middle book of which was made into the film Hugo and Josephine in 1967), the character Hugo's father is a charcoal burner. Both father and son are portrayed as independent, unmaterialistic people with forest craft skills. When Hugo is first introduced, his father the charcoal burner is in prison for assault, something Hugo attributes to him trying to live in a town instead of alone in the forest.
A father and son pair of charcoal burners in 1930s England, both named Billy, are recurring characters in the Swallows and Amazons series of children's books by Arthur Ransome.
The family of the protagonist siblings of the manga and anime Demon Slayer, Kamado Tanjirō and Kamado Nezuko, are charcoal burners; their surname, Kamado, refers to a Japanese charcoal stove. A significant part of their characterization comes from the fact they grew up in a forested mountain near a small town, cutting and burning wood.

Charcoal is used in food to color it black and for its supposed health benefits.
Activated charcoal, typically made from bamboo or coconut shell, is used as a food ingredient. It gives food an earthy, smoky taste and the black coloring gives the food an exotic, fashionable appearance.
Some health benefits have been claimed for charcoal back to classical times, when Hippocrates and Pliny recommended it for conditions such as anthrax and vertigo. Activated charcoal adsorbs chemicals and so may bind to both toxins and vital nutrients such as vitamins; its effects are broad and indiscriminate. Therefore it may also make prescription medications less effective.
Chefs and food retailers that have pioneered the use of charcoal in food include Ferran Adrià, Burger King, René Redzepi, Simon Rogan and Waitrose.
Activated charcoal is the primary ingredient in black ice cream, which is often served with a black cone also containing charcoal. The ice cream usually contains other flavorings such as horchata, almond, and coconut in order to mask the taste of the charcoal.
Safety and risk
Activated charcoal can aid certain toxins from the digestive system through a process called adsorption. This occurs because activated charcoal possesses a highly porous structure, dramatically increasing its surface area. The pores in activated charcoal can trap chemicals and other substances when it is in the stomach. This interrupts the drug or chemicals from absorbing into the bloodstream to prevent it from traveling to organs and tissues and causing damage or worse.
People using medical treatment, such as birth control pills and medication for depression, should avoid novelty meals or beverages with activated charcoal coloring, as they can render the drug ineffective.
Clarification
Charcoal and Activated charcoal vary significantly in terms of composition, manufacturing process, applications, and effectiveness.
Charcoal mostly consists of carbon, ash, water, and gasses. Activated charcoal, on the other hand, is primarily carbon but gets an extra activation process. It results in a higher surface area and porous structure. This structure makes it efficient to trap pollutants and poisons.
The production process for normal charcoal involves heating wood in a limited oxygen environment. Activated charcoal is made by heating charcoal in a hot tank without oxygen. It is then exposed to argon and nitrogen and reheated. During the second heating, the charcoal is exposed to oxygen and steam. The pores created in this process are what give it its medicinal use.
History
Ancient times
Charcoal has been used as a cooking fuel since Ancient times. The Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans all used charcoal for various reasons, including smelting, blacksmithing, and, of course, cooking. It is impossible to overstate the importance of charcoal in the evolution of early cooking processes. It was the preferred fuel for open-fire cooking. It is still enjoyed by barbecue aficionados today.
Industrial Revolution
During the medieval and Renaissance centuries, charcoal remained a key factor in the cooking sector. Cooking skills advanced with the development of charcoal-fueled ovens and stoves. This transformed the way food was prepared. Besides its functional use, charcoal cooking had historical and social importance at the time, since it was frequently connected with community meetings and cheerful events.
The manufacturing and usage of charcoal underwent significant changes during the Industrial Revolution. The introduction of charcoal fires enabled widely used manufacturing of the fuel, meeting increasing demands. However, there was also an increase away from charcoal in favor of other fuel sources such as coal and gas. Despite the transition, charcoal has managed to keep its position across multiple industries, especially cooking.
Culinary applications
Activated charcoal is commonly used as a natural food for coloring and cleaning purposes, with its efficacy in absorbing toxin properties. There are also claims of charcoal-infused food/drinks being a key to detox based on marketing and advertising rather than on scientific evidence.
Activated charcoal's deep black color undoubtedly creates a visual effect in bread. Its impact goes beyond aesthetics. This ingredient might change the bread's texture, potentially leading to a denser and less elastic texture due to its moisture absorption properties. Charcoal has an effect on shelf life, ash content, and even dough handling. Activated charcoal interferes with gluten formation and makes the dough stiffer.
Charcoal ice cream is simply ice cream with added charcoal, or a combination of charcoal and food coloring. Before creating ice cream, fine charcoal is put into the foundation which may be black. It can be combined with frozen yogurt, soft serve, gelato, or another similar frozen delicacy.

Charcoal iron is the substance created by the smelting of iron ore with charcoal.
All ironmaking blast furnaces were fueled by charcoal until Abraham Darby introduced coke as a fuel in 1709. The more economical coke soon replaced charcoal in British furnaces, but in the United States, where timber for charcoal was abundant, charcoal furnaces lingered much longer. Even after the introduction of anthracite smelting to the US in 1839, and the development of American coke production later in the century, charcoal iron continued to find favor because of its heat-resistance, toughness, and malleability. The last charcoal furnace in the US did not close until 1945.
In Britain, the penultimate furnace built was Alderwasley in 1764, followed by Warsash Furnace in 1869. The last working furnace at Backbarrow converted to coke in 1922.
In Western Australia, pig iron was made using charcoal between 1948 and 1981 at Wundowie. At its peak, operating two charcoal-fueled blast furnaces, the Wundowie charcoal iron and wood distillation plant produced 52,262 tons of iron in 1960/61.
There are still charcoal-based iron and steel making operations in the Brazilian state of Minas Gerais.
The traditional Japanese tatara furnace uses charcoal and ironsand to produce a mixture of iron and steel. Small quantities are still made by the Nittoho Tatara in Japan. The tatara smelting process involves direct reduction and—unlike a blast furnace—at no time is the product fully molten. The smelted iron remains in the furnace for an extended period until much of the iron has converted to tamahagane, a steel suitable for making swords.

A charcoal pile or charcoal clamp is a carefully arranged pile of wood, covered by turf or other layer, inside which a fire is lit in order to produce charcoal. The pile is tended by a charcoal burner. It is similar to a charcoal kiln, but the latter is usually a permanent structure made of materials such as stone.
History
Since antiquity, charcoal piles have been used to make charcoal. Charcoal is much lighter than natural timber and therefore easier to transport. In addition, charcoal generates much more heat. Charcoal production was therefore an important part of the economy in early modern times. At that time, charcoal was the only fuel that could generate the heat necessary for iron smelting. In the late 18th century, it is recorded that the duties of a master coalman at an ironworks were not only to ensure the supply of charcoal and to supervise charcoal burners and their assistants, but also to visit frequently the charcoal clearings (Kohlhäue) i.e. those parts of the forest used to produce charcoal.
In 1713, a process was invented for producing coke suitable for blast furnaces from hard coal (stone coal). From then on, the consumption of the more expensive charcoal decreased steadily despite increasing iron production. From the 17th century onwards, pitch furnaces were increasingly used and in the 19th century retorts were also employed. As a result, fewer and fewer charcoal piles were used. The gradual decline of charcoal began in the 19th century, when hard coal practically replaced charcoal and later also town gas and electricity became more important. The Second World War triggered a strong demand for charcoal again. At that time, motor vehicles were also powered by wood or charcoal.
Today it is of no particular economic importance; in particular due to the loss of wood gases during charcoal production, the calorific value yield from wood is extremely low. Charcoal burning is still used only for traditional reasons and for some special applications of charcoal.
Operation
In order to produce charcoal, water and the volatile components of the wood have to evaporate.
At the charcoal burning site, which is located where possible near a body of water so that it can be extinguished later, the wood pile is built in approximately hemispherical or conical piles, using short logs, mostly one-metre long, in even fashion (standing or lying down), around the central chimney (Quandel). A bank of ash and earth (Stübbewall) can be built all round the pile.
On top of this an airtight roof is constructed of dry fir branches, leaves, hay or straw, or alternatively of grass, vegetation and moss. Finally the pile is sealed airtight with a mix of ash and charcoal pieces (possibly known as 'culm' or 'brusque'; German: Lösche, Stübbe, Stibbe or Gestübe) and earth, with the exception of the central chimney. A support made of logs and planks is then built round the base of the pile. Then the pile is ignited via the chimney which is then also sealed.
A sure sign that the charring has started is the so-called 'knocking' of the pile; the intense heat causes deflagration of wood gas which, if the covering of the pile is too strong, can lead to an explosion. At the top as well as at the foot of the pile, individual holes are made in the surface, by means of which the fire in the pile is regulated. Under this blanket, incineration is conducted with carefully regulated air access in such a way that, if possible, no more wood burns than is absolutely necessary to heat the entire wood mass to the charring temperature. The wood must char, not burn, inside the pile; air being let in through the small holes so that no fire can start. But it creates a lot of heat and the water evaporates, tar condenses on the green roof, the smoke is yellowish-white and odourless. The heat of the smouldering wood inside the pile drives all liquid and volatile organic components out of the wood as smoke.
The job of the charcoal burner at this stage is to neither let the pile go out nor to let it burn down as a result of too much air over the following days or weeks (depending on the size of the pile and the weather). To do this, he drills and closes the air holes. Essentially, only the gases and vapours that develop from the heated wood should burn. By observing the smoke and its colour, the charcoal burner knows whether there is too much or too little air. The colour of the smoke that escapes indicates whether charring is complete. If the smoke is white and dense, the wood is not yet charred. If it is light, almost transparent and slightly bluish, the wood is charred. The air holes are now moved further down in order to also draw the fire into the lower areas of the kiln. Each time the draft holes are moved, the smoke colour changes, the kiln charred from top to bottom. As the charring progresses, the kiln slowly sinks in.
Once charring is complete, the fire in the pile is quickly extinguished by the clogging of the air holes. and the pile slowly begins to cool down. For better sealing the pile is often sprinkled with water and compacted with a wooden hammer. The pile has now shrunk to about half its original volume. Now the cover is opened and then the coal is pulled out with a rake, fork or shovel and spread out to cool down. Embers are extinguished with water or smothered with ash. If this is not done properly, the charcoal that has been produced burns within a very short time under great heat (exothermic reaction). The heat generated in this process is so great that it is impossible to approach the pile. The coal must now cool down for at least 12 hours. If the charcoal is too small it remains in the pile and is mixed with the ash. Only the carbon skeleton of the wood cells remains but this is still 98% of the wood. From 100 kg of hardwood, approximately 30 kg of charcoal can be obtained.
During charcoal production, by-products are generated such as wood tar, wood vinegar, wood spirit and wood gas. These cannot be fully utilised in the pile. If tar extraction was to be combined with the charring of the pile, small pits were made in the ground or the ground was lined with clay and the tar led out of the pile by means of a channel, and the wood vinegar was treated with iron or copper. Pipes led into a reservoir or wall-supported piles were built on sloping ground.
Gallery

When the central government of Somalia collapsed in 1991, the once firmly regulated Somali charcoal trade reopened. In the 1990s, the Somali Civil War, destructive El Niño floods, and reduced access to the European market caused the former prosperous banana industry to collapse, leading to an increase in reliance on the charcoal trade.
Charcoal soon became a lucrative cornerstone of the political economy in Somalia and ultimately turned into one of the most important revenues for criminal networks such as Al-Shabaab. Despite international efforts to curb the trade during the 2010s, it periodically flourished and continues to be a politically destabilising factor in the Horn of Africa region.
For centuries, the trading route has been established through trade with Arabs along the East African coast. It begins with cutting down and burning Acacia trees in Somalia, then transporting the charred remains by land to ports in southern Somalia (notably the ports of Kismayo and Barawe) before it is moved north by sea for over 4000 kilometers to hubs in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states. Despite a UN Security Council ban on all export of Somali charcoal in 2012, the charcoal trade is often disguised as originating from other countries, and corruption of maritime transport and customs officials is common. Once in the Gulf states, middlemen sell the charcoal in smaller quantities to retailers and restaurants for use in shisha water pipes and grilling meat, respectively.
Impacts of Somali charcoal trafficking
Charcoal trading in the Horn of Africa has resulted in substantial revenues for criminal organisations. During the early 2010s, Al-Shabaab generated US$8–18 million annually by taxing charcoal traffic at a single roadblock. By 2013, the total worth of exports peaked at US$360–384 million per year. Eventually, the trade declined, and by 2018 the wholesale value stood at US$120 to US$150 million per year, with annual revenues to terrorist organisations amounting to US$7.5 to US$10 million. After low to no trade activity in 2019–2021, illicit Somali charcoal trading resurfaced in 2022.
Charcoal trade has a detrimental impact on the environment in Somalia. Notably, charcoal production generates substantial deforestation in the regions of Jubaland, Bay, and Lower Shabelle. The United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates that during the years 2011 to 2017 approximately 8 million acacia trees were felled to produce 16 million bags of charcoal. This means that on average, one tree was cut down every 30 seconds during this seven-year period. If such a rate of deforestation continues, it would result in the complete depletion of trees in Somalia by the year 2060. Deforestation in turn leaves the country vulnerable to droughts, famines, and floodings and increases the risks for conflicts over resources and severe humanitarian crises.
Drivers of Somali charcoal trafficking
Drivers behind the charcoal trafficking are multifaceted. Somali charcoal traders have expressed that the trade is the only sensible livelihood, as employment is difficult to find and lack of rivers and reliable sources of water renders farming tough. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) representatives have stressed the need to address poverty and invest in opportunity for business to create conditions for other, sustainable forms of livelihood. Weak state institutions and maritime capabilities to monitor, deter and intercept the trade also drives charcoal trafficking.
A key driver of the illicit charcoal trade is the substantial demand for Somali charcoal in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states, to whom the bags of charcoal are often marked as legitimate. The business has been lucrative. In 2012, a bag of charcoal that was priced at around 3–4 US$ in Somalia was sold for approximately 10 US$ in the Gulf States. The charcoal trading pattern has exacerbated Somalia's regressive imbalances. It has resulted in Somalia's political elite becoming more reliant on personal patronage and embroiled in competing rivalries, which destabilises both Somalia and the wider Red Sea region.
United Nations embargo on charcoal exports from Somalia
On 22 February 2012 the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) passed resolution 2036 which imposed an embargo on the export of charcoal from Somalia. The resolution prohibits the import of Somali charcoal by member states and calls on neighbouring countries to enforce the embargo. The resolution aimed to cut off funding for Al-Shabaab which had been earning millions of dollars from the charcoal trade to the Gulf states. In 2014, the UNSC followed up with resolution 2182, in which Member States were authorised to inspect ships suspected of carrying charcoal from Somalia in violation of the ban, and to seize and dispose of the illicit cargo by diverting the vessels to a port. Resolution 2182 also emphasized the important role played by regional organizations, such as the African Union, for successful implementation of the embargo. The charcoal ban is still in place and was last reaffirmed in resolution 2662 in November 2022, which also stresses the need to reduce stockpiles in and around Kismayo.
Key actors
The illicit charcoal trade in Somalia is facilitated by a complex network of actors, including traders, transporters, brokers, and wholesalers, as well as those involved in producing fraudulent documents to circumvent the UN embargo on charcoal exports. Various states and international organizations have implemented anti-trafficking measures to combat the trade. This section provides an overview of the key actors involved in either perpetuating or combating the issue of Somali charcoal trafficking.
Al-Shabaab
In the early 2010s, Al-Shabaab derived its revenues from various sources related to charcoal, including production, transportation taxes, checkpoint fees, port charges, and export taxes.The taxation system imposed by Al-Shabaab has been claimed to be very sophisticated, resembling that of a small nation state.In 2012–2013, the UN monitors identified 39 charcoal traders in Kismayo. Of these, two were linked to Al-Shabaab and managed 32% of the charcoal leaving the city. Periodically, however, Al-Shabaab has also banned charcoal trade in the areas they controlled and disrupted trade to prevent revenue streams to political opponents, mainly Somali authorities. This also seems to be the current strategy.
Kenya Defence Forces and African Union Mission In Somalia (AMISOM)
According to reports of UN monitors, the Kenyan Defence Forces (KDF) and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) have undermined implementation of the charcoal ban. After taking control of important trade routes and key ports (most notably the Kismayo port) from Al-Shabaab through operation "Linda Nchi" in 2012, KDF and AMISOM were directly involved in the charcoal trafficking business, in stark violation of the embargo and explicit instructions of Hassan Sheikh, president of Somalia. In 2011–2012, Kenya argued for lifting the ban to clear the stockpiles around Kismayo but their proposal was rejected by the UN. In 2016, there were reports that Kenyan forces permitted the export of charcoal from Kismayo in exchange for a fee of US$2 per bag. Moreover, KDF and AMISOM have on multiple occasions been reported to deny the federal government and the UN monitors access to stockpiles sites and key ports of export to conduct investigations. KDF and AMISOM have also ignored attempts by UN monitors’ to establish contact with them regarding embargo compliance.
Somali authorities
The charcoal trade in southern Somalia relies on partnerships between local business communities, mainly in Kismayo, and corrupt regional authorities. The Jubaland State has profited significantly from the illicit charcoal exports by collecting tolls and fees at checkpoints and ports. In 2016, fees of approximately US$3 per bag were levied, resulting in a monthly income of between US$1.1 million and US$1.5 million for the Jubaland administration. The Jubaland administration has also detained laborers at the Kismayo port, including suspected informants. Up until 2018, the Jubba Administration was frequently criticized by UN monitors for poor implementation of the charcoal.
In 2016, UN monitors complained that the Federal Government of Somalia did not take enough action to address existing stockpiles of charcoal, which posed dangers to peace and security in the area. The monitors warned that armed groups may compete for the commercial value of the stockpiled charcoal, and that it could be exported in contravention of the sanctions.
Although the stockpiles are yet to be cleared, the federal government acknowledges the environmental and security threat posed by the trade and has called for increased international cooperation enforce the charcoal ban. Additionally, they have shared information of specific vessels carrying illegal charcoal shipments.
Importing countries
The main importers of Somali charcoal are the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, particularly the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Shisha enthusiasts in the Gulf states highly value Somali charcoal because of its distinct acacia fragrance. UN monitors have repeatedly criticised the GCC states for their inaction in enforcing the charcoal embargo imposed by resolution 2036, and for their lack of collaboration with international actors such as UN officials. In 2013, it was revealed that the six largest charcoal businessmen were identified to be based in Dubai, with some of them having direct ties to Al-Shabaab affiliations.
Eventually key importing countries began to improve their embargo enforcement capabilities. For example, in 2017, Kuwait and Bahrain exhibited proactive commitment and cooperation with UN monitors, leading to seizures of charcoal shipments. In 2018, Iran and Oman declared a halt to charcoal import from countries typically declared as an origin on falsified documents, such as Comoros, Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana.
Combined Maritime Forces (CMF)
The Combined Maritime Forces (CMF), a multinational naval partnership under the leadership of the US, has actively supported the implementation of the charcoal ban by sharing information with governments and other key actors, thereby facilitating the confiscation of charcoal. CMF have held several conferences together with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries aimed at combatting the illegal smuggling of Somali charcoal. At a 2018 conference, held in the CMF headquarters in Bahrain, the attendees agreed to enhance collaboration between CMF, relevant nations and various organisations, such as the United Nations Panel of Experts on Somalia, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), GCC, Naval Operations Centres (NOCs), and Maritime Security Centres. The aim of this strengthened partnership is to promote better information sharing and training, thus improving efforts to combat the illegal smuggling of charcoal from Somalia.
In 2019, the Combined Task Force (CTF) 152, which is the CMF branch responsible for maritime security and counterterrorism in the region, hosted a conference to discuss illegal smuggling of charcoal from Somalia with CMF and GCC representatives. Royal Navy Commodore Steve Dainton claimed that "information sharing and collaboration are key to ensuring maritime security". Aside from CTF 152, Combined Task Force 150 also takes part in the disrupting illicit charcoal movements.
United Nations actors
Several United Nations (UN) organisations, committees and functions conduct anti-trafficking measures to facilitate the implementation of the Somali charcoal embargo. Some of the most important functions are the different monitoring groups that have specifically been tasked with investigating the trade with Somali charcoal. Currently, the Panel of Experts on Somalia is the main monitoring function and releases yearly reports on the current state of the embargo implementation.
The UN Security Council (UNSC) has been actively engaged in anti-trafficking measures. Following a written request from President Hassan Sheikh in October 2014, the UNSC authorized international naval fleets to intercept any vessel suspected of transporting charcoal in the Indian Ocean. The Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Al-Shabaab oversees sanctions measures imposed upon Al-Shabaab, including the charcoal ban. In February 2023, Ishikane Kimihiro, chair of the committee, stated that the committee is now increasing its focus on investigations on Al-Shabaab's finances, including violations of the charcoal ban.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is also involved in charcoal ban enforcement, providing recommendations for the UNSC. The organisation has developed a guide aimed to support officials who come across potentially illegal shipments of charcoal from Somalia. The guide provides detailed guidelines for sampling and classification of charcoal, as well as instructions on writing forensic reports suitable for court processes.
The Programme for Sustainable Charcoal Reduction and Alternative Livelihoods (PROSCAL) was implemented by Somalia in collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). PROSCAL seeks to provide energy alternatives to communities affected by charcoal production to reduce their reliance on it and to strengthen the capabilities of Somali institutions to enforce the charcoal embargo. However, little information has been released by the UN about the programme's progress and impact.
Other actors
In 2013, charcoal trade in Kismayo involved Kenyan Somali traders who acted as brokers for larger traders in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and representatives for individual consignments of charcoal being exported. Some of these traders operated directly on behalf of Al-Shabaab. Some of the individuals involved in the illicit trade are business leaders and politicians who had received support from the international community to rebuild the Somalia's state institutions.
From 2017 onwards, UN monitors observed that illicit charcoal trade appeared to have been facilitated by more formalised transnational criminal networks operating between Somalia and the UAE. Notably, the monitors acquired information regarding the All Star Group corporation, believed to be the primary supplier, trafficker, and investor in the charcoal trade. The corporation held exclusive agreements for both exports and revenue sharing with the Interim Jubba Administration and Al-Shabaab, respectively.
The EU has also played a part in anti-trafficking measures. For example, in 2018 the European Union Naval Force in Somalia (EUNAVFOR or Operation Atalanta) assisted in investigating charcoal trafficking in the region and enabled UN investigations outside Buur Gaabo and Kismayo. EUNAVFOR monitors the Western Indian-Ocean and reports incidents of suspicious vessel activity, such as illegal export of charcoal. However, High Representative/Vice-President of the EEAS Josep Borrell has suggested that an exit for Operation Atalanta should be sought, expressing the need for Somalia to "take full ownership for its own security by the end of 2024". Through the African Peace Facility, the EU granted 1.08 billion Euro between 2007 and 2015 to AMISOM.
Recent history of the Somali charcoal trade
2009–2014
After Al-Shabaab’s capture of the port of Kismayo in 2009, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) began importing Somali charcoal at an increasing rate. In 2011, the UAE imported 143 million kg of Somali charcoal, up from 83 million kg in 2008. Estimates of the total quantity of exported Somali charcoal has varied. UN monitors estimated 3.5 to 4.5 million sacks exported in 2010, whereas statistics from the UAE and Saudi Arabia indicated the quantity to be over 7 million sacks. In 2011, the export increased, with UN monitors estimating the total trade to be 9–10 million sacks, generating US$25 million a year of revenues to Al-Shabaab.
During this period, the creek of Sharjah in the UAE was the main port of entry for charcoal traders, and the UAE also served as a transit point for charcoal repackaged and prepared for re-export to other countries in the region. A similar pattern was observed in Saudi Arabia, where import rose to 107 million kg in 2011, up from 66 million kg in 2010.
Despite the charcoal ban by UNSC resolution 2036 in 2012, both authorities of Somalia and importing Gulf countries failed to take sufficient measures to curb the trade. In fact, the trade continued to increase in the immediate period after the ban.
From 2012 to 2014, the scale of the international trade in Somali charcoal remained consistent, with Al-Shabaab profiting on a larger scale than when they controlled the port of Kismayo. Main importers during this period were the UAE, Oman and Kuwait.
From 2015 to 2018
Following the capture of Barawe port by the Somali National Army and AMISOM in October 2014, Al-Shabaab lost control over major export sites for charcoal. In 2015, trade at the port seemingly stopped, and Al-Shabaab's overall role and revenues from charcoal trade decreased. However, export from the remote coastal town of Buur Gaabo expanded, but it was unclear who had authority over the trade.
Despite the local expansion at Buur Gaabo, the total export of Somali charcoal declined in 2015–2016. In 2016 UN monitors approximated the trade to be an average of 5,25 million sacks of charcoal per year. Part of the reason behind the decline was the improvement of enforcement capabilities on part of key importers, most notably the UAE, disincentivizing charcoal exporters in Somalia. Another explanation is that, in 2015, Al-Shabaab shifted strategy towards banning charcoal in areas under their control and attacking traders rather than managing the trade themselves. According to UN monitors, unconfirmed reports of a breakdown in a revenue-sharing agreement between Al-Shabaab and the president of the Jubaland State of Somalia, Ahmed Mohamed Islam, may explain this strategic shift. However, exports of charcoal continued from Kismayo and Buur Gaabo (which were also the main locations for charcoal stockpiling) to Dubai.
In 2016–2017, the level of illegal charcoal exports from southern Somalia remained unchanged compared to previous years. About 4 million sacks were estimated to be exported from Kismayo and Buur Gaabo in 2017. In 2017–2018 the trade declined even more to about 3 million sacks per year. Hamriyah Port in the UAE, Duqm Port and Shinas port in Oman, and the Kish free zone and Qeshm free zone in Iran were the main import points. The two Iranian ports were mainly used for transhipment of Somali charcoal to the UAE.
From 2018 to present
In 2019, 2020, and 2021 UN monitors did not observe any instances of charcoal exports from Somalia. The last significant shipment took in place August 2018, when 4,750 tons of charcoal, consisting of 190,000 sacks, left Kismayo for Khor Al Zubair port in Iraq. In Iraq, it was repackaged and shipped to neighbouring states from January to April 2019.
According to UN monitors, several possible explanations are linked to the halt in charcoal exports. Notably, key states such as UAE, Oman, Kuwait and Iran had begun implementing the embargo in 2018. Various efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia, Jubaland authorities, and the international community allegedly prevented charcoal exports. The Federal Government of Somalia increased political messaging about the negative environmental impact of charcoal production, contributing to the decline in trade. The Jubaland administration prevented large-scale charcoal exports from Kismayo and Buur Gaabo. International partners, including the CMF, EU Naval Force (through operation Atalanta), FAO, and UNODC, further deterred charcoal traders through satellite and naval monitoring. The use of political pressure, surveillance, and international naval forces acted as strong deterrents combined.
In 2021 charcoal stockpiles at Kismayo and Buur Gaabo amounted to 600,000 to 900,000 sacks. The charcoal trade continues within Somalia as charcoal remains a fundamental source of energy for Somali communities. In 2019, Al-Shabaab resumed attacks on charcoal traders in Somalia to undermine the revenue earned by local administrations.
In 2022 the first significant charcoal export from Somalia since 2018 occurred when the MV Fox illegally exported 4,425 metric tons of charcoal from Kismayo. The vessel eventually had an emergency outside the coast of Oman and was seized by Omani authorities in accordance with resolution 2036 (2012). According to investigations by Correctiv in late 2022, charcoal is also being exported from the ports of Mogadishu and Barawe.
Despite increased efforts to implement the embargo by key actors, weak port control structures, the absence of a capable Somali coast guard, and considerable charcoal stockpiles remain significant risks to continuous implementation. UN monitors recommended a one-time partial liftingof the charcoal embargo in 2022 to facilitate the clean-up of existing stockpiles around Kismayo, which are estimated to be worth US$12 million.
Charcoal trafficking methods
Discrete shipments
Vessels used to traffic charcoal vary in size. However, smaller dhows with a maximum capacity of around 35,000 sacks are typically the preferred type of vessel by Somali charcoal smugglers. In 2013–2014, traders increasingly began to break up shipments into smaller quantities loaded onto less conspicuous dhows. Many dhow vessels do not use refined navigation systems, which makes it difficult for international maritime organisations and naval forces to track them.
As commodities that were traditionally transported on dhows, such as dates, are now traded in containers following expanded economic liberalisation, dhow owners have expressed concern that there are few other viable cargos besides charcoal. This has pushed dhows into the charcoal shadow economy in the Western Indian Ocean. This has also led to increased suspicion towards dhow owners, who occasionally have been wrongfully condemned for supporting militant groups like Al-Shabaab.
Larger charcoal ships that are equipped with automatic identification system transceivers switch them off to avoid detection. Additionally, traders may mask physical identifying features, such as vessel names. Monitoring shipments is further complicated by the fact that smugglers stockpile and load charcoal in remote locations, such as for example Buur Gaabo, to avoid detection.
Sugar-charcoal trade cycle
In early 2010s an established trade cycle involved the importation of sugar to Somalia and the export of charcoal to the GCC countries on the same vessels. Charcoal traders would send their ships to Barawe or Kismayo to load charcoal for the return trip after offloading sugar at the port of Mogadishu. In 2012, 26 per cent of the ships offloading at the port of Mogadishu were heading to Kismayo next and most of them originated from Dubai, UAE. Notable cases involved the vessels MV Victoria, MV Diamond Sun, MV Ashraf B and MV Alba Star.
Fabricated documentation of origin
The falsification of customs documentation has been the primary method of circumventing the charcoal ban. False documentation is used by dhows at the unloading port, mainly in the UAE, to mask their actual port of origin. Forged paperwork claim that Somali charcoal originates from countries such as Comoros, Djibouti, Kenya, Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire, Tanzania or Pakistan. Some certificates of origin are completely forged by charcoal traders without any involvement on part of officials from these countries. In other cases, consulates or embassies of the countries of origin may legally attest the documents or even forge them themselves. For example, forgeries have been reported to be created within the UAE with the help of corrupt intermediaries in exchange for commissions.
The Gulf states’ official records of charcoal imports imply substantial use of fabricated documents. As official import of Somalia declined radically around 2014, imports of charcoal from countries such as the Comoros, Djibouti or Kenya drastically increased. For example, according to data from the UAE, no charcoal was imported from Somalia in 2013 and 2014, whereas the imported charcoal from Djibouti rose from zero in 2011 to almost 41 million kg by 2014.
Repackaging charcoal at transhipment destinations to conceal its origin has also been a common practice to evade the charcoal ban. For example, in 2018 UN monitors reported that Somali charcoal was repackaged in Iran into white bags labelled as "Product of Iran". The charcoal was then reloaded onto smaller Iranian-flagged dhows and exported to the port of Hamriyah, UAE, using false certificates of origin claiming Iran to be the country of manufacture.
Flagging of foreign countries
Several vessels carrying Somali charcoal have been confirmed to either be owned by Indian nationals or flying the Indian flag. In 2014, UN monitors claimed that many owners of these vessels expressed that they could not provide details about the cargo and its destination because they chartered their vessels to middlemen and brokers. Some owners, however, confirmed that they knew fake certificates of origin were used for the charcoal. The brokers that chartered their vessels were usually based in Dubai.

Charcoal-burning suicide is a suicide method which is achieved by burning charcoal in a closed room or area. Death occurs by carbon monoxide poisoning.
Mechanism of action
As the charcoal burns, the concentration of carbon monoxide (CO), produced by the incomplete combustion of carbon, gradually increases. The carbon monoxide (CO) rapidly binds to hemoglobin, compromising the transport of oxygen within the body. This results in death by hypoxia caused by acute carbon monoxide poisoning. CO concentrations of as little as one part per thousand can be fatal if inhaled over a period of two hours.
Some survivors who attempted the method report that they chose it because they considered it "easy and painless" when compared with other suicide methods. Unlike jumping from a great height or cutting oneself with a knife, the person does not have to confront the fear of pain. The practice is often associated with alcohol or hypnotic drugs, and many survivors report not having felt any discomfort.
Some dispute the claim that the process is painless, noting that oxygen deprivation can cause asphyxia and a consequent involuntary struggle response by the body, mediated by changes in pH detected by chemoreceptors in the medulla oblongata. However, this claim is based on a misunderstanding of the method, which causes death not through lack of oxygen but through the accumulation of CO in the blood serum. Symptoms of acute CO poisoning include, among others, headache, nausea, tachycardia, and seizures. Someone rescued while still alive will require intensive care treatment and may suffer permanent brain damage as a result of hypoxia.
History
One of the earliest known suicides by inhalation of charcoal fumes may have been that of Porcia Catonis. Porcia Catonis, daughter of Cato the Younger and widow of Marcus Junius Brutus, officially died from ingesting hot coals, which may have been a euphemism for suicide by burning charcoals. Amédée Berthollet, son of Claude Louis Berthollet, supposedly died by this method in 1811. The suicide method also appears in nineteenth-century literature such as Eugène Sue's The Wandering Jew (1844).
Incidents
Two students of Taipei First Girls' High School ended their lives by charcoal-burning in a hotel in Su'ao, Yilan in July 1994. They left a note that did not state clearly the reason for killing themselves, even though it was suspected in some mass media that they were a lesbian couple.
A middle-aged woman in Hong Kong took her own life using this method inside her small, sealed bedroom in November 1998. She had a chemical engineering background. She was suffering from an economic depression at the time, and suicide in general was increasing. After the details of this suicide were highly publicised by local media, many others killed themselves in this way (an example of the Werther effect). Within two months, charcoal-burning had become the third major suicide killer in Hong Kong. Charcoal-burning suicide accounted for 1.7% of Hong Kong suicides in 1998 and 10.1% in 1999. By 2001, it had surpassed hanging as the second most-common method of suicide in Hong Kong (second only to jumping), accounting for about 25% of all suicide deaths. The method has since spread to mainland China, Taiwan and Japan.
Starting in 2003, authorities in Japan have observed a series of group suicides carried out by strangers who met in suicide chat rooms online. Such a group will typically use sleeping pills and charcoal stoves in a van parked in a remote area.
On 26 July 2006, 16-year-old Brazilian musician Vinícius Gageiro Marques, known by his alias Yoñlu, locked himself in his bathroom with two barbecue grills, and posted on a forum asking for help killing himself. While some people in the thread pleaded him to stop, others gave him the advice he wanted. A Canadian online friend of Marques's learned of the suicide attempt and called the Brazilian authorities. Although the police and paramedics were able to enter the apartment and clear the smoke, Marques was pronounced dead after multiple attempts at resuscitation.
Brad Delp, the lead singer of the American rock band Boston, killed himself using this method on 9 March 2007.
Kim Jong-hyun, a member of the South Korean idol group SHINee, was found unconscious in a Gangnam residential hotel on 18 December 2017. He was later pronounced dead, aged 27. The police ultimately ruled his death a suicide through the earlier text messages sent to his sister, after the discovery of charcoal briquette remnants in a frying pan at the scene.
Du Yuwei, an ex-member of GNZ48, ended her life on 16 October 2018 using this method.
On 26 May 2019, Goo Hara, a former member of South Korean idol group Kara, attempted suicide by burning charcoal. After being removed from where she was found unconscious in a smoke-filled room and given hyperbaric oxygen treatment, she regained consciousness two days later. She subsequently issued a public apology for causing concern amongst fans, a preventive measure against the Werther effect in South Korea and Japan. Hara later died by suicide in November 2019, though the method of her suicide remains publicly undisclosed.
Lee Sun-kyun, an award-winning South Korean actor, died by suicide on 27 December 2023 using this method.
On 2 February 2024, Australian–Hong Kong actor Gregory Charles Rivers died by suicide using this method.
Prevention
Unrestrained dissemination by the media—which consequently induced the Werther effect—and easy access to charcoal in supermarkets and convenience stores has led people who might otherwise not have committed suicide to do so, with particular prominence in urban areas. Prevention strategies targeting these factors, such as the introduction of guidelines for media reporting and restricting access to charcoal, have been proposed as ways to combat suicide rates.
An intervention program conducted in New Taipei required that charcoal packages be removed from store shelves, with customers needing to request a shop assistant to retrieve them from a locked compartment. The experiment found a 37% reduction in cases of charcoal-burning suicide in the city, without a concomitant increase in other types of suicide.
As a measure to prevent further deaths, the government of Hong Kong began promoting the use of electric barbecues. Some non-governmental organizations (NGOs) worked with charcoal packers to promote the message "Cherish your life" together with suicide helpline numbers on charcoal packaging.

Chaîne opératoire (French: [ʃɛn‿ɔpeʁatwaʁ]; lit. 'operational chain' or 'operational sequence') is a term used throughout anthropological discourse, most commonly in archaeology and sociocultural anthropology. The term denotes a description of the stages of production of material culture—especially pottery and stone tools made through lithic reduction—from raw material acquisition to tool production to use to abandonment.
The chaîne opératoire was born out of archaeologists' interest in elevating lithic analysis beyond simple typology. Building an object's chaîne opératoire is an important methodological tool. In a chaîne opératoire approach, archaeologists create a full biography of technologies, attempting to understand their craftsmanship and use in different social groups. By understanding the processes and construction of tools, archaeologists can better determine the evolution of technology, model human behavior, and understand the development of ancient cultures. As archaeologists come to understand an object's chaîne opératoire, they better understand human choices and technical traditions.
The concept of technology as the science of human activities was first proposed by French archaeologist, André Leroi-Gourhan, and later by the historian of science André-Georges Haudricourt. Both were students of Marcel Mauss who had earlier recognised that societies could be understood through its techniques by virtue of the fact that operational sequences are steps organised according to an internal logic specific to a society.
Artifact analysis has undergone several changes throughout its history, shifting from an orientation as a natural science of prehistoric humans to a social and cultural anthropology of the production techniques of prehistoric societies. From this perspective, a chaîne opératoire can be understood as a social product, as it calls for an interdisciplinary approach to artifact analysis (the integration of associated disciplines: archaeology, sociocultural anthropology, biological anthropology, and anthropological linguistics), which offers a multidimensional view of a society, and demonstrates how a chaînes opératoire cannot operate independently of the society which produces it. Consequently, the study of the technique - or chaîne opératoire - enables one to better understand not only the society in which the technique originated, but also the social context, actions, and cognition that accompanied the production of an object.
Criticism of chaîne opératoire
Critics of chaîne opératoire argue that it is subjective because it is based upon the analyst's personal experience and intuition. They further claim that it is not a replicable or quantifiable approach to data collection. A second objection is that chaîne opératoire claims to be able to identify the intentions and goals of prehistoric knappers, including the "desired endproducts" of knapping sequences. However, what archaeologists select from an assemblage as "end products" may not match what people in the past thought worthwhile to select for transport and subsequent use elsewhere in the landscape. A third major problem with the chaîne opératoire approach is that there is severe inconsistency in the application of definitions by lithic analysts. For example, since the publication of Éric Boëda's definition of six nondisassociable criteria for Discoidal debitage, numerous variants have been proposed, and many authors have argued for the presence of Levallois concept (that Eric defined from features of the Levallois technique) even when those six criteria were not met.

The Chelleo-Acheulean is a Palaeolithic stone tool industry that marks a transitional stage between the Chellean (Abbevillian or Oldowan) and the Acheulean. Louis Leakey identified eleven stages of development in the Chelleo-Acheulean "hand axe culture" in Africa.

Chemical metallurgy is the science of obtaining metals from their concentrates, semi products, recycled bodies and solutions, and of considering reactions of metals with an approach of disciplines belonging to chemistry. As such, it involves reactivity of metals and it is especially concerned with the reduction and oxidation, and the chemical performance of metals.
Subjects of study in chemical metallurgy include the extraction of metals, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and chemical degradation (corrosion).

Chert () is a hard, fine-grained sedimentary rock composed of microcrystalline or cryptocrystalline quartz, the mineral form of silicon dioxide (SiO2). Chert is characteristically of biological origin, but may also occur inorganically as a chemical precipitate or a diagenetic replacement, as in petrified wood. Where chert occurs in chalk or marl, it is usually called flint.
Chert is typically composed of the petrified remains of siliceous ooze, the biogenic sediment that covers large areas of the deep ocean floor, and which contains the silicon skeletal remains of diatoms, silicoflagellates, and radiolarians. Precambrian cherts are notable for the presence of fossil cyanobacteria. In addition to microfossils, chert occasionally contains macrofossils. However, some chert is devoid of any fossils.
Chert varies greatly in color, from white to black, but is most often found as gray, brown, grayish brown and light green to rusty red and occasionally as dark green. Its color is an expression of trace elements present in the rock. Both red and green are most often related to traces of iron in its oxidized and reduced forms, respectively.
Description
In petrology, the term "chert" refers generally to all chemically precipitated sedimentary rocks composed primarily of microcrystalline, cryptocrystalline and microfibrous silica. Most cherts are nearly pure silica, with less than 5% other minerals (mostly calcite, dolomite, clay minerals, hematite, and organic matter.) However, cherts range from very pure cherts with over 99% silica content to impure nodular cherts with less than 65% silica content. Aluminium is the most abundant minor element, followed by iron and manganese or potassium, sodium, and calcium. Extracrystalline water (tiny inclusions of water within and around the quartz grains) make up less than 1% of most cherts.
The Folk classification divides chert into three textural categories. Granular microquartz is the component of chert consisting of roughly equidimensional quartz grains, ranging in size from a fraction of a micron to 20 microns, but most typically 8 to 10 microns. Chalcedony is a microfibrous variety of quartz, consisting of radiating bundles of very thin crystals about 100 microns long. Megaquartz is composed of equidimensional grains over 20 microns in size. Most chert is microcrystalline quartz with minor chalcedony and sometimes opal, but cherts range from nearly pure opal to nearly pure quartz chert. However, little opal is over 60 million years old. Opaline chert often contains visible fossils of diatoms, radiolarians, and glass sponge spicules.
Chert is found in settings as diverse as hot spring deposits (siliceous sinter), banded iron formation (jaspilite), or alkaline lakes. However, most chert is found either as bedded chert or as nodular chert. Bedded chert is more common in Precambrian beds, but nodular chert became more common in the Phanerozoic as the total volume of chert in the rock record diminished. Bedded chert is rare after the early Mesozoic. Chert became moderately abundant during the Devonian and Carboniferous and again became moderately abundant from the Jurassic to the present.
Bedded chert
Bedded chert, also known as ribbon chert, takes the form of thinly bedded layers (a few centimeters to a meter in thickness) of nearly pure chert separated by very thin layers of silica-rich shale. It is usually black to green in color, and the full sequence of beds may be several hundred meters thick. The shale is typically black shale, sometimes with pyrite, indicating deposition in an anoxic environment. Bedded chert is most often found in association with turbidites, deep water limestone, submarine volcanic rock, ophiolites, and mélanges on active margins of tectonic plates. Sedimentary structures are rare in bedded cherts. The typically high purity of bedded chert, like the high purity of other chemically precipitated rock, points to deposition in areas where there is little influx of detrital sediments (such as river water laden with silt and clay particles.) Such impurities as are present include authigenic pyrite and hematite, formed in the sediments after they were deposited, in addition to traces of detrital minerals.
Seawater typically contains between 0.01 and 11 parts per million (ppm) of silica, with around 1 ppm being typical. This is far below saturation, indicating that silica cannot normally be precipitated from seawater through inorganic processes. The silica is instead extracted from seawater by living organisms, such as diatoms, radiolarians, and glass sponges, which can efficiently extract silica even from very unsaturated water, and which are estimated to presently produce 12 cubic kilometers (2.9 cu mi) of opal per year in the world's oceans. Diatoms can double their numbers eight times a day under ideal conditions (though doubling once per day is more typical in normal seawater) and can extract silica from water with as little as 0.1 ppm silica. The organisms protect their skeletons from dissolution by "armoring" them with metal ions. Once the organisms die, their skeletons will quickly dissolve unless they accumulate on the ocean bottom and are buried, forming siliceous ooze that is 30% to 60% silica. Thus, bedded cherts are typically composed mostly of fossil remains of organisms that secrete silica skeletons, which are usually altered by solution and recrystallization.
The skeletons of these organisms are composed of opal-A, an amorphous form of silica, lacking long-range crystal structure. This is gradually transformed to opal-CT, a microcrystalline form of silica composed mostly of bladed crystals of cristobalite and tridymite. Much opal-CT takes the form of lepispheres, which are clusters of bladed crystals about 10 microns in diameter. Opal-CT in turn transforms to microquartz. In deep ocean water, the transition to opal-CT occurs at a temperature of about 45 °C (113 °F) while the transition to microquartz occurs at a temperature of about 80 °C (176 °F). However, the transition temperature varies considerably, and the transition is hastened by the presence of magnesium hydroxide, which provides a nucleus for the recrystallization. Megaquartz forms at elevated temperatures typical of metamorphism.
There is evidence that the variety of chert called porcelainite, which is characterized by a high content of opal-CT, recrystallizes at very shallow depths. The Caballos Novaculite of Texas also shows signs of very shallow water deposition, including shallow water sedimentary structures and evaporite pseudomorphs, which are casts of crystals of soluble minerals that could have formed only in near-surface conditions. This novaculate appears to have formed by replacement of carbonate fecal pellets by chert.
Subvarieties
Bedded cherts can be further subdivided by the kinds of organisms that produced the silica skeletons.
Diatomaceous chert consists of beds and lenses of diatomite which were converted during diagenesis into dense, hard chert. Beds of marine diatomaceous chert comprising strata several hundred meters thick have been reported from sedimentary sequences such as the Miocene Monterey Formation of California and occur in rocks as old as the Cretaceous. Diatoms were the dominant siliceous organism responsible for extracting silica from seawater from the Jurassic and later.
Radiolarite consists mostly of remains of radiolarians. When the remains are well-cemented with silica, it is known as radiolarian chert. Many show evidence of a deep-water origin, but some appear to have formed in water as shallow as 200 meters (660 ft), perhaps in shelf seas where upwelling of nutrient-rich deep ocean water support high organic productivity. Radiolarians dominated the extraction of silica from seawater prior to the Jurassic.
Spicularite is chert composed of spicules of glass sponges and other invertebrates. When densely cemented, it is known as spicular chert. They are found in association with glauconite-rich sandstone, black shale, clay-rich limestone, phosphorites, and other nonvolcanic rocks typical of water a few hundred meters deep.
Some bedded cherts appear devoid of fossils even under close microscopic examination. Their origin is uncertain, but they may form from fossil remains that are completely dissolved in fluids that then migrate to precipitate their silica load in a nearby bed. Eolian quartz has also been suggested as a source of silica for chert beds. Precambrian bedded cherts are common, making up 15% of middle Precambrian sedimentary rock, and may have been deposited nonbiologically in oceans more saturated in silica than the modern ocean. The high degree of silica saturation was due either to intense volcanic activity or to the lack of modern organisms that remove silica from seawater.
Nodular chert
Nodular chert is most common in limestone but may also be found in shales and sandstones. It is less common in dolomite. Nodular chert in carbonate rocks is found as oval to irregular nodules. These vary in size from powdery quartz particles to nodules several meters in size. The nodules are most typically along bedding planes or stylolite (dissolution) surfaces, where fossil organisms tended to accumulate and provided a source of dissolved silica, but they are sometimes found cutting across bedding surfaces, where the chert fills fossil burrows, fluid escape structures, or fractures. Nodules under a few centimeters in size tend to be egg-shaped, while larger nodules form irregular bodies with knobby surfaces. The outer few centimeters of large nodules may show desiccation cracks with secondary chert, which likely formed at the same time as the nodule. Calcareous fossils are occasionally present that have been completely silicified. Where chert occurs in chalk or marl, it is usually called flint.
Nodular chert is often dark in color. It can have a white weathering rind that is known in archaeology as cortex.
Most chert nodules have textures suggesting they were formed by diagenetic replacement, where silica was deposited in place of calcium carbonate or clay minerals. This may have taken place where meteoric water (water derived from snow or rain) mixed with saltwater in the sediment beds, where carbon dioxide was trapped, producing an environment supersaturated with silica and undersaturated with calcium carbonate. Nodular chert is particularly common in continental shelf environments. In the Permian Basin (North America), chert nodules and chertified fossils are abundant in basin limestones, but there is little in the carbonate buildup zone itself. This may reflect dissolution of opal where carbonate is being actively deposited, a lack of siliceous organisms in these environments, or removal of siliceous skeletons by strong currents that redeposit the siliceous material in the deep basin.
The silica in nodular chert likely precipitates as opal-A, based on internal banding in nodules, and may recrystallize directly to microquartz without first recrystallizing to opal-CT. Some nodular chert may precipitate directly as microquartz, due to low levels of supersaturation of silica.
Other occurrences
The banded iron formations of Precambrian age are composed of alternating layers of chert and iron oxides.
Nonmarine cherts may form in saline alkaline lakes as thin lenses or nodules showing sedimentary structures suggestive of evaporite origin. Such cherts are forming today in the alkaline lakes of the East African Rift Valley. These lakes are characterized by sodium carbonate brines with very high pH that can contain as much as 2700 ppm silica. Episodes of runoff of fresh water into the lakes lowers the pH and precipitates the unusual sodium silicate minerals magadiite or kenyaite, After burial and diagenesis, these are altered to Magadi-type chert. The Morrison Formation contains Magadi-type chert that may have formed in the alkaline Lake T'oo'dichi'.
Chert may also form from replacement of calcrete in fossil soils (paleosols) by silica dissolved from overlying volcanic ash beds.
Fossils
The cryptocrystalline nature of chert, combined with its above average ability to resist weathering, recrystallization and metamorphism has made it an ideal rock for preservation of early life forms.
For example:
The 3.2 Ga chert of the Fig Tree Formation in the Barberton Mountains between Eswatini and South Africa preserved non-colonial unicellular bacteria-like fossils.
The Gunflint Chert of western Ontario (1.9 to 2.3 Ga) preserves not only bacteria and cyanobacteria but also organisms believed to be ammonia-consuming and some that resemble green algae and fungus-like organisms.
The Apex Chert (3.4 Ga) of the Pilbara craton, Australia preserved eleven taxa of prokaryotes. However, these findings have been disputed.
The Bitter Springs Formation of the Amadeus Basin, Central Australia, preserves 850 Ma cyanobacteria and algae.
The Rhynie chert (410 Ma) of Scotland has remains of a Devonian land flora and fauna with preservation so perfect that it allows cellular studies of the fossils.
Prehistoric and historic uses
Chert is of only modest economic importance today as a source of silica (quartz being much more abundant in sand). However, chert deposits may be associated with valuable deposits of iron, uranium, manganese, phosphorite, and petroleum.
Tools
In prehistoric times, chert was often used as a raw material for the construction of stone tools. Like obsidian, as well as some rhyolites, felsites, quartzites, and other tool stones used in lithic reduction, chert fractures in a Hertzian cone when struck with sufficient force. This results in conchoidal fractures, a characteristic of all minerals with no cleavage planes. In this kind of fracture, a cone of force propagates through the material from the point of impact, eventually removing a full or partial cone, as when plate glass is struck by a small hard projectile. The partial Hertzian cones produced during lithic reduction are called flakes, and exhibit features characteristic of this sort of breakage, including striking platforms, bulbs of force, and occasionally eraillures, which are small secondary flakes detached from the flake's bulb of force.
When a chert stone is struck against an iron-bearing surface, sparks result. This makes chert an excellent tool for starting fires, and both flint and common chert were used in various types of fire-starting tools, such as tinderboxes, throughout history. A primary historic use of common chert and flint was for flintlock firearms, in which the chert striking a metal plate produces a spark that ignites a small reservoir containing black powder, discharging the firearm.
Construction
Cherts can cause several problems when used as concrete aggregates. Deeply weathered chert develops surface pop-outs when used in concrete that undergoes freezing and thawing because of its high porosity.
A second concern is that certain cherts undergo an alkali-silica reaction with high-alkali cements. This reaction leads to cracking and expansion of concrete and ultimately to failure of the material.
Varieties
There are numerous varieties of chert, which are classified by their visible, microscopic and physical characteristics. Examples are:
Flint is a compact microcrystalline quartz. It was originally the name for chert found in chalk or marly limestone formations formed by a replacement of calcium carbonate with silica. Commonly found as nodules, this variety was often used in past times to make bladed tools. Today, some geologists refer to any dark gray to black chert as flint. The dark color is from inclusions of organic matter. Among non-geologists, the distinction between "flint" and "chert" is often one of quality – chert being lower quality than flint. This usage of the terminology is particularly prevalent in Great Britain where most true flint (found in chalk formations) was of better quality than "common chert" (from limestone formations).
"Common chert" is a variety of chert which forms in limestone formations by replacement of calcium carbonate with silica. This is the most abundantly found variety of chert. It is generally considered to be less attractive for producing gem stones and bladed tools than flint.
Jasper is a variety of chert formed as primary deposits, found in or in connection with magmatic formations, and owes its typical red color to hematite inclusions. Jasper frequently also occurs in black, yellow and green, depending on the type of iron it contains. Jasper is usually opaque to near opaque. Jasper is also present in banded iron formation, where it is described as jaspilite.
Radiolarite is a variety of chert formed as primary deposits and containing radiolarian microfossils. Many show evidence of a deep-water origin, but some appear to have formed in water as shallow as 200 meters (660 ft).
Chalcedony is a microfibrous quartz.
Agate is distinctly banded chalcedony with successive layers differing in color or value.
Onyx is a banded agate with layers in parallel lines, often black and white (sardonyx).
Magadi-type chert is a variety that forms from a sodium silicate precursor in highly alkaline lakes such as Lake Magadi in Kenya.
Novaculite is a very dense, fine-grained, and uniform form of very pure white chert with a high content of extracrystalline water. It is most common in the mid-Paleozoic rocks of Texas, Oklahoma, and Arkansas in the south-central United States, where it has undergone some metamorphism.
Porcelanite is a term used for fine-grained siliceous rocks with a texture and a fracture resembling those of unglazed porcelain. It likely forms in shallow water and is composed mostly of opal-CT.
Tripolitic chert (or tripoli) is a light-colored porous friable siliceous (largely chalcedonic) sedimentary rock, which results from the weathering (decalcification) of chert or siliceous limestone.
Siliceous sinter is porous, low-density, light-colored siliceous rock deposited by waters of hot springs and geysers.
Mozarkite a varicolored, easily polished Ordovician chert that takes a high polish. It is the state rock of Missouri.
Other lesser used archaic terms for chert are firestone and silex.

A chimney starter or charcoal chimney is a device for igniting charcoal lumps or briquettes. It consists of a metal tube with a grate to hold charcoal. A lighting cone is a similar, conical, device placed over an existing grate. The tube is typically cylindrical, but may also have other cross-sections. The tube may also be made of combustible material designed to resist burning long enough for the coals to ignite.
Modern commercial models are usually sheet steel cylinders about 6–8 in (15–20 cm) in diameter and 8–12 in (20–30 cm) tall. A grate or mesh to hold charcoal is placed horizontally inside the cylinder about 3 in (7.6 cm) from the bottom; this is sometimes conical. Large holes around the bottom let air in. Modern commercial chimneys generally have insulated handles.
History
A 1910 British design for a cylindrical metal portable stove is described as "also applicable for use as a Fire Lighter" and describes the use of paper kindling below a conical grate, with wood or coal above it.
A 1917 design closely resembles a modern chimney starter: a metal cylinder with a raised grate and air holes below the grate. However, it is not described as a fire starter, but as a "camp stove".
Home-made versions in the 1950s, called kindle cans, were often made from metal coffee, fruit juice, or motor oil cans with ventilation holes punched with a can opener or tin snip. Some designs had a grate. They often did not have handles, and needed to be handled with tongs.
Various kinds of chimney starter have been patented over the years.
Design considerations
Chimney starters essentially work by increasing the draft, supplying more oxygen to the coals. Taller starters are more effective than shorter ones. In empirical studies of lighting cones for Haitian charcoal stoves (which are placed over a grate rather than having an integrated grate), the ignition time and charcoal consumption were halved compared to lighting on a shallow bed grate, and carbon monoxide production was reduced by 40%. The cone also protected the charcoal from the wind, and helped direct the smoke away from users.
Using a chimney starter
The chimney starter is used by placing kindling—typically paper—under the grate and charcoal over it. When the kindling is lit, it ignites the charcoal and creates a draft. Since the coals are held together, radiation heats adjacent coals, and convection heats coals higher in the stack. Once all the charcoal is burning (glowing red on the bottom and ashed over on the top), the chimney is lifted by its handle and the burning charcoal dumped into the grill.
If some burning charcoal remains in the chimney, adding new charcoal will quickly ignite it.
Cooking
One can also cook directly over the chimney starter with an additional top grate. This provides high-intensity heat for fast searing.

Chip formation is part of the process of cutting materials by mechanical means, using tools such as saws, lathes and milling cutters.
The formal study of chip formation was encouraged around World War II and shortly afterwards, with increases in the use of faster and more powerful cutting machines, particularly for metal cutting with the new high speed steel cutters. Pioneering work in this field was carried out by Kivima (1952) and Franz (1958).
Chip formation is usually described according to a three-way model developed by Franz. This model is best known within the field of machine tool design, although it is also used when an application area, such as woodworking, requires a vocabulary to describe chip formation in more detail than is usually attempted.
Chip classification
The first three chip types are the original characterisation, by Dr. Norman Franz. The type of chip that forms depends on many factors, of both tool and material. In general, main factors are the angle formed by the edge faces of the tool and also the angle at which this is presented to the surface.
Sharpness of the cutting tool does not usually define the type of chip, but rather the quality of the chip, and the clear distinctions between types. A blunt tool produces a degenerate chip that is large, torn and varies from one means of formation to another, often leaving behind a poor quality surface where this means changes.
Type I chip
Type I chips form when a material splits ahead of the cutting edge, owing to some upwards wedge action of the tool exceeding the tensile strength of the material, perpendicular to the surface. They are thus particularly important in fibrous materials, such as wood, where individual fibres are strong but they may be levered apart relatively easily. Type I chips generally form in cutting by tools with shallow cutting angles.
Type I chips may form long, continuous swarf, limited in size only by the length of cut.
This is the idealised chip formation for wood shavings, particularly those produced by a well-tuned plane with a finely adjusted mouth.
Type II chip
Type II chips form when a shearing force is produced by the wedge of the tool angle. The material fails along a short angled plane, from the apex of the tool edge, diagonally upwards and forwards to the surface. The material deforms along this line, forming an upward curling chip. These chips generally form from intermediate cutting angles.
Type II chips may form in ductile materials, such as metals.
Type II chips may also form long, continuous swarf.
Type III chip
Type III chips form a compression failure of the material, ahead of a relatively obtuse cutting angle, approaching 90°. In some weak or non-ductile materials this may form an acceptable chip, usually as a fine dust, but often it gives rise instead to a random "snowplough" effect where the waste material is bunched up ahead of the tool but not cleared decisively away as a well-formed chip.
This type of chip is formed by routers. It is also formed by woodworking scrapers, although when properly sharpened and used, these form such a thin Type III chip that it instead appears as a well-formed Type II chip. Their waste chip is thin enough that the compression failure volume is small enough to act as for the well-defined shear plane of the Type II.
Type 0 chip
This type was characterised later, by William McKenzie (1960).

Chipped stone crescents are a class of artifact found mainly associated with surface components of archaeological sites located in the Great Basin, the Columbia Plateau, and throughout California. Although their distribution covers a large portion of the western United States, crescents are often found in similar contexts in close proximity to water sources including playas, lakes, rivers, and mainland and island coast lines. Crescents are generally thought to be diagnostic to the terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene (approx. 12,000–8,000 years before present [YBP]) and are representative of assemblages that include fluted and stemmed projectile points.
The exact purpose of crescents is unknown, but scientists suggest they may have been hafted as a projectile point, or used as part of a throwing stick.
Crescent morphology
Crescents are a type of artifact or group of artifacts that are somewhat morphologically diverse, but typically consist of a chipped-stone tool that is bilaterally symmetrical, bifacially pressure flaked, may have winged edges, and typically have edge-grinding. Crescents are typically found as part of surface assemblages as opposed to well-dated subsurface contexts, and lack good chronology which would indicate if the degree of morphological variability represents changes over time, or if the differences represent regional expressions. Crescent morphology has been subdivided into three groups including lunate, winged, and eccentric crescents. Lunate crescents typically have a curved/convex proximal lateral edge with a generally straight to convex distal lateral edge. Winged crescents are characterized by convex proximal lateral edge and a concave distal lateral edge. Some eccentric crescents have been described as being shaped like animals such as bears, while others consist of serrated or barbed edges. The most common materials crescents are made of include chert, chalcedony, and jasper—all strong and durable lithic materials that are not as brittle as obsidian; however, although it's rare, some crescents are made of obsidian.
The Paleocoastal crescents have crafted bifaces. This is caused by heat through technological advances.
Temporal and spatial distribution
Chipped-stone crescents are found within the western United States, primarily as part of surface assemblages throughout the Great Basin, the Columbia Plateau, and in California – primarily along the mainland and Channel Island coastlines, as well as the San Joaquin Valley and Mojave Desert. Crescents are associated with archaeological assemblages dating from the Terminal Pleistocene-to the Early Holocene (12,000-8,000 calibrated years before present [cal BP]) and tend to disappear from the archaeological record after 7,500 cal BP. Of the thousands of crescents documented to date in the western United States, approximately 94 percent of the sites in which they were discovered are within 10 kilometers of large existing or extinct bodies of water including wetlands, marches, rivers, and pluvial lakes.
In the Great Basin, crescents are often found in artifact assemblages characterized as belonging to the Western Stemmed Tradition (WST), which is composed of artifact classes that would indicate an economy focused on big-game hunting. These WST assemblages represent a timeframe spanning from approximately 12,000-8,500 cal BP, which spanned the Terminal Pleistocene and Early Holocenea period of cooler and wetter climate that supported hundreds of pluvial lakes throughout the Great Basin. Many WST assemblages are found on the remnant landforms of pluvial lakes; however, there are some that are found in caves far from known bodies of water.
In California, the known distribution of crescents extend along the coast from Sonoma County in the north to northern Baja in the south, in addition to inland settings in the southern San Joaquin Valley where crescents have been recovered along shorelines of extinct lakes. Approximately one-third of the crescents recovered from coastal California sites come from Santa Rosa and San Miguel islands. Though many crescents found on the islands are associated with surface artifact scatters, there are those that have been recovered from stratified subsurface deposits from which diagnostic artifacts, such as the Channel Island Barbed projectile point, as well as with faunal assemblages comprising waterfowl, seabirds, marine mammals, and fish.
Within the San Joaquin Valley, thousands of crescents have originated from sites located on the shoreline of Tulare Lake, which covered much of the southern portion of the valley. Similarly, crescent fragments have also been found in subsurface deposits dating to 7,600-8,200 cal BP associated with sites on the shoreline of extinct Buena Vista Lake, also located in the southern San Joaquin Valley.

Choking rescue training devices are choking simulation equipment used by first aid learners to prepare for dealing with real world choking scenarios. They have been approved and used by the European Resuscitation Council, St John Ambulance, and International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. The simulation devices are used to demonstrate choking rescue techniques such as abdominal thrusts and backslap method and practice choking rescue protocols by American Heart Association and Red Cross.
Devices
Anti-choking training vests
The Anti-Choking Trainer, developed by Act+Fast, LLC, is a light-weight neoprene vest that users wear to practice the abdominal thrust maneuver and backslap method. There are two protocol models available: Act+Fast Red with a Back Slap Pad for the Red Cross Choking Rescue Protocol and Act+Fast Blue for the American Heart Association Protocol.
Choking manikins
Choking Charlie
The Choking Charlie manikin, developed by Laerdal Medical, is an adult torso specifically designed for training students in the performance of the Heimlich Maneuver and backslap method. Cast by a human specimen, Choking Charlie's realistic anatomy and response-using simulated boluses provide instructors with a tool for instructing and practicing the anti-choking techniques.
Simulaids
Simulaids choking manikins are life-sized and are designed for choking training in specific individuals. The manikins are in infant, child and adult sizes and are also modelled in different body types such as obese choking manikin. The manikins are designed anatomically accurate internally as well allowing for choking boluses to be inserted for providing visual feedback upon performing anti-choking techniques.
Operations
The simulation device is designed so when the trainee does the Heimlich maneuver correctly a foam plug, simulating a foreign body airway obstruction (FBAO), is launched in the air.
The manikins are used for practicing the abdominal thrust maneuver, the back slap method and CPR. When the abdominal thrusts are performed correctly, the object simulating the FBAO is expelled from the manikin's airway. The manikins have anatomical landmarks including a ribcage, jugular notch, and xiphoid process to provide anatomical reference points for demonstrations.
Reception and real world use
Choking rescue training devices have been used in first aid training in schools, rescue groups and fire departments.
The use of the devices in first aid training has been attributed to help save individuals choking in real world scenarios.

Archaeologists define a chopper as a pebble tool with an irregular cutting edge formed through the removal of flakes from one side of a stone.
Choppers are crude forms of stone tool and are found in industries as early as the Lower Palaeolithic from around 2.5 million years ago. These earliest known specimens were found in the Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania by Louis Leakey in the 1930s. The name Oldowan was given to the tools after the site in which they were excavated. These types of tools were used an estimated time range of 2.5 to 1.2 million years ago.
Formation
To create this tool, one would have to use a hammerstone to chip away flakes on the stone to create a side of the stone with a very sharp edge, allowing for the cutting and hacking of an object. This is a unique type of lithic reduction, as only a single side of the stone is retouched to produce the cutting surface of the stone. The side that does not do the cutting is left unscathed, an unusual practice. These old instruments were made from specific materials. Initially, they were composed of quartz, quartzite, basalt, or obsidian. In the later years of the Oldowan age, two other materials were used: flint and chert. These materials could hold an edge while still being fairly easy to craft into the shape desired. The tool is designed to fit in the palm of the hand, and it is not attached to any other mount that could possibly be used. Known as one of the earliest tools (if not the earliest), its design is a very simple piece of technology, but its performance was very successful in many different scenarios. Seeing the history of these objects and how many cultures used them, it is not a surprise to find them spread throughout the world. A potential stone mass found today could be classified as a chopper if it has a worn edge showing evidence of tool use.
Locations
Choppers are not solely limited to a single area on Earth:
As mentioned earlier, Africa is known to have supplied the earliest known choppers, specifically known as the Oldowan. Many countries have given sites containing many of these stone tools, including Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, and South Africa.
In North America, similar stone tools have been found in south and southwestern states, such as Oklahoma.
Europe also has been the home to choppers, with assemblages of stone tools having been found in Europe. Many countries have had Oldowan tools found within them, including Sweden, Portugal, Georgia, Bulgaria, Russia, Spain, Italy, France, Germany, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and the United Kingdom.
Stone tools, including choppers, dating back to 1.66 million years ago, have been found in Asia. These countries include China, Pakistan, Israel, and Iran.
A large assemblage of stone lithics were found in Northern Thailand, the Sao Din excavation. Out of the 139 artifacts recovered, many of them fell into the chopper category. These findings helped set Southeast Asian stone technology apart from the classic European Acheulean assemblages.
Although many choppers have been found in each region, this does not mean that the tools found are similarly made. Differences include the shape, length, material used, and other factors. This shows the variation among ancient cultures of the time and how each suited specific needs for each community.
Usage
The ancient peoples that inhabited the earth had many different stone tools to perform various activities. Choppers were used in equal amounts for woodworking, presumably for sharpening spears, and meat processing. However, choppers were used for many different purposes. Used for hacking, cutting, and chopping, choppers allowed early peoples to sever soft materials, especially meat and wood. One of the main uses of choppers was to cut through the meat and skins of hunted animals to obtain food, hide, and fur. The sharpness of the tool improved the overall process. Ridges and cut marks on bones can prove their use for the task. Also, these tools were used on plants, such as digging up roots and shaving and chopping wood.
Advancement over time
Later in history, it seems that choppers were being rendered obsolete by newer technology. The handheld tools for scraping and cutting were no longer sought after, for tools with shapes that fit the hand seemed to be the upcoming trend. Starting about 1.6 million years ago, this new technology evolution emerged, known as the Acheulean tradition. Tools classified under this category are known as the earliest indicators of hand axe usage. The biggest difference from the early Oldowan tools, or choppers, is the fact that two sides have had flakes chipped off, versus the single side of the chopper.
Early ideas
Initial theories proposed by G. Isaac (1970s) that choppers were used for hunting and butchering. However, the size of the choppers did not suggest that it could be powerful enough to actually kill animals like the hippopotamus. L. Binford then proposed that animals were killed by carnivores and Homo was just a scavenger. This theory was tested by P. Shipman and R. Potts. Since the cut marked bones were tooth marked and there were no carcasses or disarticulation of any leftovers, the evidence pointed at the idea of Homo being a scavenger.

In archaeology a chopper core is a suggested type of stone tool created by using a lithic core as a chopper following the removal of flakes from that core. They may be a very crude form of early handaxe although they are not bifacially-worked and there is debate as to whether chopper cores were ever used as tools or simply discarded after the desired flakes were removed.
They are found in the early Mode 1 tool industries of the Oldowan and Clactonian industries during the Lower Palaeolithic.

In archaeology a chopping tool is a stone tool. Stone tools are usually dated by determining the age of the find context e.g. by carbon-14 dating and potassium–argon dating. The oldest stone tools are about 3 million years old.
Chopping tools mainly occur in the Olduwan (2.9 to 1.6 million years ago). The oldest object in the British Museum is a chopping tool found in the Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania.
Usually naturally occurring rather flat pebbles were used to produce a chopping tool. At one end flakes were removed by hard hammer percussion in an alternating manner i.e. from one flat surface and then from the other to produce a sharp edge at the ridge between the two surfaces.
The most frequent raw material ('type of rock') is volcanic rock e.g. basalt, but other rocks exhibiting conchoidal fracture were used as well.
The use of the chopping tool varied from place to place just like any other archaeological artifact, depending on what the maker of the chopping tool made or ate depended on what the chopping tool was used for. Most commonly the chopping tool was used for food purposes. They could be used for cutting down tree branches to get to fruits or to cut large plants that could be used for food. Anything that requires a knife today could have been replaced with a chopping tool. They were also used to help assist the maker in cutting the meat of the animals. Just like butchers today, skinning and cleaning of all the meat that we eat is needed. The chopping tool helped assist hunters gather the meat, especially from large animals that were hard to carry back to the location they were staying at, and make it edible for them to consume. Another use for the chopping tool was to smash bones. Bone marrow is a good source of nutrients. For hunters and gatherers this was important since the next source of food could have been days to weeks away. When they would hunt animals they would use the sharp edge to cut the meat off the bones and then the back edge was hard enough to smash and crush bones. Once the bones were crushed the marrow could be collected.
The flakes that were chipped off the soft rock did not go to waste. Many of the thick sharp pieces were used as small knives to do very light cutting tasks. The flakes were a very important part of everyday life just like the chopping tool. Both pieces were used in everyday life to help with survival.
The idea of the chopping tool spread from people to people throughout the land. In Asia stone tools did not develop as much as other places in the world. Tools like the chopping tool list be made from specific types of rock such as flint and jasper. In Asia these rocks were hard to find but the amount of the coarse-grained rocks and material was much easier to find. Even though the materials they used such as volcanic material and petrified wood were not as strong or as easy to shape they still were able to make tools that resembled the chopping tool and they were used in very similar ways. Many of the tools that were found in Asia, they were found in the Choukoutienian caves. The Choukoutienian industry is where many of the stone tools in Asia started. The caves are filled with many artifacts and the early chopping tool is one of the many artifacts found.
The resources used to make many variations of the chopping tool were present in much of the world. Even if the items that were used to make the chopping tool in various parts of the world were not as durable or as powerful or sharp they still were used for cutting items as well as day to day survival.

The different bladed weapons (swords, dress-swords, sabers, rapiers, foils, machetes, daggers, knives, arrowheads, etc.) have been of great importance throughout history. In addition to its use for fighting, or in wars, bladed weapons have been the object of special considerations, forming part of funerary rituals, mythology and other ancestral traditions.
History
The present chronology is a compilation that includes diverse and relatively uneven documents about different families of bladed weapons: swords, dress-swords, sabers, rapiers, foils, machetes, daggers, knives, arrowheads, etc., with the sword references being the most numerous but not the unique included among the other listed references of the rest of bladed weapons.
Prehistoric Era
The oldest known Oldowan tools were found in Gona, Ethiopia. These are dated to about 2.6 mya.
Early examples of hand axes date back to 1.6 mya in the later Oldowan (Mode I), called the "developed Oldowan" by Mary Leakey. These hand axes became more abundant in mode II Acheulean industries that appeared in Southern Ethiopia around 1.4 mya. Some of the best specimens come from 1.2 mya deposits in Olduvai Gorge.
Bronze swords
Copper daggers appeared first in the early Bronze Age, in the 3rd millennium BC, and copper daggers of Early Minoan III (2400–2000 BC) were recovered at Knossos.
The earliest known depiction of a khopesh is from the Stele of the Vultures, depicting King Eannatum of Lagash wielding the weapon; this would date the khopesh to at least 2500 BC. The khopesh evolved from the epsilon or similar crescent-shaped axes that were used in warfare.
The first known bronze swords with a length equal to or greater than 60 cm date from the 17th century BC in regions of the Black Sea and the Aegean Sea. A sword must be constructed from the correct alloy, have the right shape, and have the necessary thermal (and finishing) treatments applied to it for it to be useful in combat. In a longer sword, the stresses (bending and buckling) are more important. What is needed is a weapon that is hard enough (to cut), fairly flexible (without being fragile) and quite durable enough to withstand blows.
The manufacturing process is summarized as follows: The bronze swords were cast into moulds, heated to a certain temperature and allowed to cool slowly before being cold hammered (a process whereby they are hit with a hammer on a type of anvil) to increase their hardness.
c. 1275 BC. Assyrian sword, with inscriptions.
c. 650 BC. According to Pausanias, Theodore of Samos invented the casting of bronze objects.
5th century BC-5th century AD
c. 450 BC. Herodotus. He mentioned iron swords (as a representation of the god Ares/Mars) in Scythian people's tombs
c. 401 BC. He described the Indian steel (Wootz steel) and two swords made with that material.
326 BC. Battle of the Hidaspes River. Alexander defeated King Porus, who gave him about 10 kg of "Indian steel" (Wootz steel).
c.230 BC. Philo of Byzantium In his treatise Belopoeica (artillery), he describes the flexibility of the swords of the Celts and Iberians in Hispania. An elastic behavior, such as a spring, would imply some tempered steel content in the mentioned swords.
216 BC. Battle of Cannae Polybius described the swords of the Iberians (good for cutting and thrusting) and those of the Gauls (good for cutting).
c. 209 BC. After the Battle of Cartagena, Gladius was promoted by Scipio Africanus for the Roman army.
197 BC. The Gauls were defeated by the Romans, led by Gaius Cornelius Cetegus near the River Clusius (perhaps the current Brembo River). In spite of the numerical superiority of the Gauls, their swords were bent at the first blow and had to be straightened. The Romans took advantage of this weakness to win the battle.
c. 20 BC. Diodorus Siculus was a Greek historian of Sicily that lived in the 1st Century BC, and a contemporary of Julius Caesar and Augustus. His comments on the celtiberian swords indicate the cut quality and an aspect of their manufacture.
c. 5 BC. Gratio Falisco, in his poem Cynegeticon, mentions the knives of Toledo: "... Ima toledano praecingunt ilia cultro ..."
c. 50. Pliny the Elder talks about the types of iron, and the importance of water in the temper of steel.
c. 90 AD The poet Martial, born in Bilbilis (near Calatayud), prided himself on the steel of his country, better than the Gallic and the Noricum.
Middle Ages
The longsword emerges in the 14th century, as a military steel weapon of the earlier phase of the Hundred Years' War. It remains identifiable as a type during the period of about 1350 to 1550. Use of the two-handed Great Sword or Schlachtschwert by infantry (as opposed to their use as a weapon of mounted and fully armoured knights) seems to have originated with the Swiss in the 14th century.
In the Nanboku-chō period (1336–1392), long weapons such as ōdachi were popular, and along with this, sasuga (刺刀), a kind of tantō (short sword or knife) used by lower-ranking samurai lengthened and finally became katana.
The Turko-Mongol sabre was used by a variety of nomadic peoples of the Eurasian steppes, including Turkic and Mongolic groups, primarily between the 8th and 14th centuries.
c. 500. Ship wrecked near Nydam (Denmark) with a cargo of swords of the type "pattern-welded".
c. 700. According to a Japanese legend from the province of Yamato, the sword maker Amakuni was concerned that many swords were broken in battle. And after days of work and prayer, he modified the forging and tempering process by getting swords that were curved and did not break in combat.
796. The emperor Charlemagne rendered the king Offa of Mercia with a sword made by Huns, obtained like war loot.
802. Harun al-Rashid possessed a sword of great quality, called Samsam or Samsamah. Supposedly it was a sword that had belonged to a king of Yemen. Nikephoros I, the Byzantine Emperor, sent him a few swords of Byzantine manufacture, indicating that he no longer wanted to pay the tribute. Harun broke them all with his Samsam sword, and he did not blunder the least.
c. 850. Abu Yusuf well Ishaq al-Kindi describes the swords of Damascus.
c. 900. First documentation of the tachi. Master Yasu-tsuna (from Hoki)
966. Embassy of Borrell II to To the-Hàkam II. giving a present of 100 "frank swords", very famous and feared.
1146. Earliest clear references to naginata.
1233. James I of Aragon mentions the sword called "Tiso" (forged in Monzón in the siege of Burriana.
1248. Sword Lobera of the king Fernando III de Castilla.
1274. Sword of the knight Soler de Vilardell (Sword of Vilardell). A sword considered magical, "of virtue". Its cut quality indicates a very successful manufacturing process.
1370. Last will of Peter IV of Aragon with the sword of Sant Martí and the sword of Vilardell.
1392. Ibn Hud Ibn Hudhayl, in his work " Gala de caballeros y blasón de paladines ", mentions two types of quality swords: those of Indian steel and those of the francs (Catalan) . The latter with exceptional qualities and supposedly forged by genius.
1425. The sword makers of Valencia asked for confirmation of their ordinations, copied from those of the sword makers of Barcelona.
....Item. Senyor los dits privilegis, capítols e ordinacions vees(?) plaurets a Déu a justícia (e) egualtat car axí son stats obtenguts per la spaseria de ciutat vostra de Barchinonae per vos atorgats (a) aquella segons han pres los prohomens de la spaseria de la dita vostra ciutat de Valencia...1425...Alfonsi Dei gratia Regis Aragonum, Sicilie, Valencie, Majoricam, Sardinie et ...
Examination of applicants for master of sword making:
They had to present:“4 fulles d’espases e recapte per a guarniment de aquelles. Ço és la una fulla de dues mans la qual haie a guarnir vermella. E l’altra fulla sia de una mà la qual haie a esser guarnida mitadada de dues colors. E l’altra de una mà que sia buydada e guarnida tota negra. E la quarta ço és un estoch d’armes tot blanch los quals guarniments se vien(?) e haien a fer per lo volent usa(n)t de la dita spaseria dins la casa e habitació de un dels dits diputats...”
1433. Barcelona. In the "Book of the councils" of the guild of sword makers, the way of tempering the leaves of the swords is indicated.
In folio f_099r and others of the "Guild book of the sword makers" appears the expression "confrare ho confraressa" . Apparently a woman could belong to the guilt of sword makers. Maybe only as the wife or widow of a sword maker.
1450-1700 AD
Bilbo, a cut-and-thrust sword were forged in Toledo from Basque bilbo steel and exported to Americas in 16th century.
Claymore in use from the 15th to 17th centuries, The word claymore was first used in reference to basket-hilted swords during the 18th century in Scotland and parts of England.
The first known mention of the use of bayonets in European warfare was in the memoirs of Jacques de Chastenet, Vicomte de Puységur. He described the French using crude 1-foot (0.30 m) plug bayonets during the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648).
1474. The fencing teacher of Majorca Jaume Ponç was the author of a fencing treatise published in Perpinyan.
1478. References of the sword maker Julián del Rey. Related to the famous swords with the mark of the "perrillo" (supposedly a stylized dog). He probably was the same persona as a former Muslim armourer who was baptised and under the protection of Fernando el Católico, who worked in Zaragoza and Toledo.
1509. Marriage of Catalina of Aragon and Henry VIII of England. Swords of the armoury of Zaragoza presented to the English king
1517. Superiority of the sword over other weapons in the war of the conquistadores against the Native Americans in Florida.
1522. Sword of Ignacio de Loyola offered to the Virgin of Montserrat.
1525. Battle of Pavia. Francis I of France surrendered his sword to Joan Aldana, a cavalier native of Tortosa.
1540. "Pirotechnia", work of Vannoccio Biringuccio, armourer of Siena. Among other topics it deals with some iron mines and the reduction of the mass in a forge with bellows.
c. 1541. Sword of Francisco Pizarro, made in Valencia by the armourer Mateo Duarte.
1544. Hunting saber of Henry VIII of England, decorated by Diego Çaias.
1546. Georgius Agricola (Latinized name of Georg Bauer). Work "De Natura Fossilium" which deals with mineralogy. He talks about iron exporting regions and the area of ??Noricum (now Steyr in Austria) that produced steel for the quality of the mineral. In other places (Bilbao, Turassio in Spain and Como in Italy) steel would be "manufactured" by the quality of the water.
1547. Mentioned the sword called "de San Martí". (See year 1370)
1547. Law agreed on the maximum length of the sword-blades of Mallorca, Valencia and Catalonia.
1579. Styria records delivery of some 700 Dusäggen by local bladesmiths, besides payment of 40 Dusäggen delivered from Passau, as part of the preparation for the war against the Turks under Archduke Charles II.
1599. The Pope Clement VIII gives a sword of Solingen as a present to the king Henry IV of France.
1600. Rapier developed as a result of the geometrical theories of such masters as Camillo Agrippa, Ridolfo Capo Ferro, and Vincentio Saviolo.
1611. Oldest definition of a cinquedita. (“Cinquedita: a weapon but five fingers long used in Venice”. Similar to a sgian-dubh. So the modern definition of Cinquedea should be inaccurate.).
1700-1950 AD
The Dirk was the traditional sidearm of the Highland Clansman and later used by the officers, pipers, and drummers of Scottish Highland regiments around 1725 to 1800
The modern Épée (épée) derives from the 19th-century épée de combat, a weapon which itself derives from the French small sword.
1742. "Dictionnaire Universel De Commerce", Jacques Savary des Bruslons, Philémon-Louis Savary. French name of the composite leaves with iron core and steel exterior ("lame de ettofe").
1750. News about the "varnished iron" or "iron" mines of Mondragón.
1760. Carlos III of Spain orders to Luis de Urbina, infantry colonel, a report on the bladed weapons factories of Toledo, Valencia, Zaragoza and Barcelona (in precarious state) to establish a new factory in Toledo
1761. " Bladed weapons Factory of Toledo" (Fábrica de armas blancas de Toledo), created by decree of Carlos III of Spain. It was organized and directed by the Valencian sword's master Lluis Calisto, contracted expressly.
1766. Esquilache Riots
1772. Henry Nock was the founder of a gun-making company. He bequeathed to his manager James Wilkinson, maker of the famous swords and sabers.
1772. Rules for Californian presidios. Soldado de cuera. Cutting arms. Broad sword and lance characteristics.
1781–1782. For the armament of the Presidio of Santa Barbara (California) the swords of Toledo are rejected and they are asked for German, Valencian or Barcelona swords, more suitable for military tasks. According to Felipe de Nieve report English by Richard S. Whitehead): "... Uniforms are in deplorable shape due to the fact that supply ships have not arrived. Much of the equipment is defective. Safeties on the pistols are inoperative and The swords of Toledo are so tempered that they can be broken to pieces if they are used carelessly. ".
1782. William Bowles, "Introduction to Natural History and the Physical Geography of Spain." With information on the making of swords in Spain.
1793–1795. War of the Pyrenees. The weapon workshops in Catalonia, are opened again.
1798. History of the political economy of Aragon. Ignacio Jordán de Assó. talks about the sword makers of Zaragoza .
1804. James Wilkinson.
1844. Henry Wilkinson
1849. "Barcelona General Guide"; Manuel Saurí, José Matas. Describes the sword of the guild of sword makers of Barcelona (60 inches long, 24 inches to the crosshead), which required a strong man to carry it in parades.
1851. Sword of Toledo (of Manuel de Ysasi) presented to the Great Exhibition of London. It could be unsheathed and sheathed in a nearly circular sheath.
1856. Details of the manufacture of swords (according to the Toledo Factory).
1865. Henry George O'Shea. "A guide to Spain". List of swords of the armoury of the Royal Palace of Madrid (at the time of the publication of the work).
1943. Sword of Stalingrad

Chvorinov's rule is a physical relationship that relates the solidification time for a simple casting to the volume and surface area of the casting. It was first expressed by Czech engineer Nicolas Chvorinov in 1940.
Description
According to the rule, a casting with a larger surface area and smaller volume will cool more quickly than a casting with a smaller surface area and a larger volume under otherwise comparable conditions. The relationship can be mathematically expressed as:
t
B
(
V
A
)
n
{\displaystyle t=B\left({\frac {V}{A}}\right)^{n}}
Where t is the solidification time, V is the volume of the casting, A is the surface area of the casting that contacts the mold, n is a constant, and B is the mold constant.
This relationship can be expressed more simply as:
t
B
M
n
{\displaystyle t=BM^{n}}
Where the modulus M is the ratio of the casting's volume to its surface area:
M
V
A
{\displaystyle M={\frac {V}{A}}}
The mold constant B depends on the properties of the metal, such as density, heat capacity, heat of fusion and superheat, and the mold, such as initial temperature, density, thermal conductivity, heat capacity and wall thickness.
Mold Constant
The S.I. unit for the mold constant B is seconds per metre squared (s/m2). According to Askeland, the constant n is usually 2, however Degarmo claims it is between 1.5 and 2. The mold constant B can be calculated using the following formula:
B
[
ρ
m
L
(
T
m
−
T
0
)
]
2
[
π
4
k
ρ
c
]
[
1
+
(
c
m
Δ
T
s
L
)
2
]
,
{\displaystyle B=\left[{\frac {\rho _{\mathrm {m} }L}{\left(T_{\mathrm {m} }-T_{0}\right)}}\right]^{2}\left[{\frac {\pi }{4k\rho c}}\right]\left[1+\left({\frac {c_{\mathrm {m} }\Delta T_{\mathrm {s} }}{L}}\right)^{2}\right],}
Where
Tm = melting or freezing temperature of the liquid (in kelvins),
T0 = initial temperature of the mold (in kelvins),
ΔTs = Tpour − Tm = superheat (in kelvins),
L = latent heat of fusion (in [J·kg−1]),
k = thermal conductivity of the mold (in [W·m−1·K−1)]),
ρ = density of the mold (in [kg·m−3]),
c = specific heat of the mold (in [J·kg−1·K−1]),
ρm = density of the metal (in [kg·m−3]),
cm = specific heat of the metal (in [J·kg−1·K−1]).
It is most useful in determining if a riser will solidify before the casting, because if the riser solidifies first then defects like shrinkage or porosity can form.

The Clarion–Clipperton zone (CCZ) or Clarion–Clipperton fracture zone is an environmental management area of the eastern and central Pacific Ocean, lying between Hawaii and Mexico. It is one of the world's largest known fields of polymetallic nodules and is administered by the International Seabed Authority (ISA) under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The region includes the Clarion fracture zone and the Clipperton fracture zone, geological submarine fracture zones. Clarion and Clipperton are two of the five major lineations of the northern Pacific floor. They were discovered by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in 1954.
The CCZ extends around 4,500 miles (7,240 km) East to West and spans approximately 4,500,000 square kilometres (1,700,000 mi2). The fractures themselves are unusually mountainous topographical features. Depths across the CCZ generally range from 4,000 to 6,000 metres (9,800 to 19,700 ft).
The Clarion-Clipperton Zone is regularly considered for deep-sea mining due to the rich deposits of manganese, nickel, copper, and cobalt. Scientific surveys, however, have found the CCZ contain an abundance and diversity of life – more than half of the species collected were new to science. These findings have led to significant environmental and governance debates, particularly centering ISA permits regarding mining regulations, like the operation of the "two-year rule", and international calls for a precautionary pause or moratorium on commercial seabed mining.
Etymology
The Clarion fracture zone is named after Clarion Island, a volcanic island in the Revillagigedo Archipelago west of Mexico. Similarly, the Clipperton fracture zone is named after Clipperton Island located along the same latitude as the feature.
The combined term "Clarion-Clipperton Zone" was later adopted by the International Seabed Authority to represent the larger environmental regulated region that includes both the fracture zones and surrounding abyssal plain.
Geography
The fractures can be divided into four parts:
The first, 127°–113° W, is a broad, low welt of some 900 miles (1,400 km), with a central trough 10 to 30 miles (16 to 48 km) wide;
The second, 113°-107° W, is a volcano enriched ridge, 60 miles (97 km) wide and 330 miles (530 km) long;
The third, 107°-101° W, is a low welt with a central trough 1,200–2,400 feet (370–730 m) deep which transects the Albatross Plateau; and
The fourth, 101°-96° W, contains the Tehuantepec Ridge which extends 400 miles (640 km) northeast to the continental margin.
The Nova-Canton Trough is often seen as an extension of the fractures.
The underlying crust in the CCZ consists mainly of Mid-Eocene to Early Miocene basaltic seafloor, forming extensive abyssal hills and plains. The seafloor is capped by a sequence of deep-sea sediments. With the thick layers of Mid-Eocene at the bottom, there are recent chalks (the Marquesas Oceanic Formation) and siliceous clay-ooze (the Clipperton Formation) that may reach 20-30 metres thick. Local geomorphology includes knoll seamounts, potholes formed in chalk units, and mobile sediment drifts. Together, the seabed captures a diverse microhabitat, and the region's geological heterogeneity is thought to contribute to variations in benthic biodiversity and ecosystem structure.
The zone contains nodules made up of valuable rare-earth and other minerals. Some of these play an essential role for the energy transition to a low carbon economy. These nodules form around bone fragments or shark teeth. Micronodules then further aggregate and accrete into the clumps targeted for harvesting.
Clipperton fracture zone
The Clipperton fracture zone is the southernmost of the north east Pacific Ocean lineations. It begins east-northeast of the Line Islands and ends in the Middle America Trench off the coast of Central America, forming a rough line on the same latitude as Kiribati and Clipperton Island, from which it gets its name.
Clarion fracture zone
The Clarion fracture zone is the next Pacific lineation north of Clipperton FZ. It is bordered on the northeast by Clarion Island, the westernmost of the Revillagigedo Islands, from which it gets its name. Both fracture zones were discovered by the U.S. research vessels "Horizon" and "Spencer F. Baird" in 1954.
Deep sea mining
The Clarion–Clipperton Zone lies within "the Area," meaning the portions of seabed beyond national jurisdiction, as defined under the United Nation Convention on the Law of Sea (UNCLOS). The Area is legally designated as the Common Heritage of Mankind (CHM), proposed by Arvid Pardo in 1967, and mineral explorations in the CCZ are under the regulation of the International Seabed Authority. Governance of the CCZ emerged from late twentieth-century debates on deep-sea resource rights, specifically discussions comparing treatment of seabed and economic exclusive zone (EEZ).
Since the 2000s, large areas of the CCZ have been surveyed for mineral and environmental assessments. 173,000 km2 of the region has been mapped in seven regions associated with the NORI, TOML, and Marawa exploration contract areas. These mapped zones span roughly 2,000 km longitudinally (116°–134.5° W) and 700 km latitudinally (10°–16° N). The ISA has also designated thirteen Areas of Particular Environmental Interest (APEIs) intended to preserve representative ecosystems across the CCZ. However, some biodiversity surveys indicate that many known species have been observed exclusively outside of APEIs, raising debates regarding their representativeness. Approximately 1,000,000 square kilometres (390,000 mi2) of the region has been claimed by 16 mining regions. A further nine areas, each covering 160,000 square kilometres (62,000 mi2), have been set aside for conservation.
The International Seabed Authority (ISA) estimates that the total amount of polymetallic nodules in the Clarion–Clipperton zone exceeds 21 billion tons (Bt), containing about 5.95 Bt of manganese, 0.27 Bt of nickel, 0.23 Bt of copper and 0.05 Bt of cobalt. Geochemical surveys show that nodule composition varies significantly across the region: Mn/Fe ratios, Ni and Cu content, and Co/Ni patterns differ between eastern and western sub-domains. These differences have been linked to variations in sedimentation rate, bottom-water oxygenation, and the relative contributions of hydrogenetic and diagenetic formation processes. The nodules are generally cultivated within the geochemically active interface, below the calcite lysocline, where chalk strata are overlain by mobile siliceous clay-ooze. Acoustic surveys show higher than average seabed backscatter in zones with larger and more abundant nodules. The ISA has issued 19 licences for mining exploration within this area. Exploratory full-scale extraction operations were set to begin in late 2021. ISA aimed to publish the deep sea mining code in July 2023. Commercial license applications were to be accepted for review thereafter. By 2021, the ISA has granted 18 exploration contracts.
Seabed mining at CCZ often involves seafloor collector vehicles that use riser pipes to extract nodules systematically to the surface. These operations typically generate two types of sediment plumes. Vehicle movement approximate to the seafloor will create near-bottom collector plumes, and the extraction process will cause mid-water discharge plumes. A field experiment done by Scripps Institution of Oceanography has shown that discharge plumes become rapidly diluted but consist of fine particles capable of long-distance transport, and subsequently built a model to inform environmental guidelines regarding potential damage from sediment plumes. Considering sediment plumes being one of the main pathways for potential environmental harm in seabed mining, the International Seabed Authority (ISA) is actively developing science-based discharge thresholds to regulate plume concentration, spatial scales and duration through operational limits, real-time monitoring, and precautionary thresholds.
The two-year rule states that before regulations are passed, a member nation has the authority to notify ISA that it wants to mine. This starts a two-year clock during which the ISA can come up with rules. If it fails to do so, the mining is implicitly approved. Nauru gave notice in July 2021, creating a deadline of July 9, 2023. ISA's next meeting, however, begins a day later, on July 10.
Biodiversity in the CCZ
The Clarion-Clipperton Zone (CCZ) is habitat to diverse marine wildlife. More than 400 described species are recorded and 42% of known deep-sea species were first discovered in CCZ. Yet, environmental assessments have highlighted that biodiversity in the CCZ remains incompletely characterized. Surveys have suggested that 88-92% benthic metazoan species may remain undescribed, and Rarefaction curves show that sampling is not yet saturated, with each new survey tending to record extra discoveries. In addition, a large proportion of species in the CCZ are known from a single record, implying the proportion of unexplored biodiversity.
Researchers have begun to refine this picture at smaller spatial scales. One survey of a single 30 x 30 km study box in the UK-1 exploration area documented 42 mollusc records representing 21 species, including one described new species and more than twelve potentially undescribed taxa. The discovered genetic pull is found to have no genetic matches in public reference databases, and the authors also showed that several morphologically similar molluscs are genetically distinct. In contrast to previously held apparent cosmopolitan distributions based on morphology alone, this research suggests that a high degree of endemism might exist in the CCZ.
One species that inhabits the fracture zone are xenophyophores. A 2017 study found 34 novel species in the area. Xenophyophores are highly sensitive to human disturbances, such that mining may adversely affect them. They play a keystone role in benthic ecosystems such that their removal could amplify ecological consequences. The nodules are considered "critical for food web integrity". The zone hosts corals, sea cucumbers, worms, dumbo octopuses and many other species.
Along with the xenophyophores, many types of species reside in the Clarion–Clipperton zone: protists, microbial prokaryotes, and various fauna including megafauna, macrofauna, and meiofauna, each distinguished by size. Due to the lack of historical research in the region—in large part because of the inaccessibility, monetary, and physical cost without modern technology—very little is known about life in the CCZ. The increasing tests in the region have led to the discovery of many new species, suggesting both a high species richness and high species rarity within the CCZ. It seems that polymetallic nodules in the region, the target of much deep-sea mining, are crucial for fostering a high level of biodiversity on the sea floor. Even so, there are many gaps in the current understanding of the ecosystem roles played, life history traits, sensitivities, spatial or temporal variabilities, and resilience of these species.
Some studies have suggested that polymetallic nodules form "nodule provinces" that provide distinctive hard-substrate habitat in an otherwise sediment-dominated abyssal plain. Studies have shown abundant infaunal species such as Nucula profundorum inhabit in these soft sediments, as well as nodule-attached molluscs and other epifauna, indicating that nodules add structural complexity and increase the diversity of available microhabitats at the seafloor. Geological heterogeneity has been proposed as another important driver of biodiversity in the CCZ. The region contains abyssal hills, knolls, potholes, seamounts, sediment drifts and nodule-rich plains, accompanied with layers of chalk and clay-ooze formations. Researchers note that sediment type, relief, or bedrock exposure may play a vital rule in the composition of benthic communities, and habitat diversity and resource distribution may be more closely linked than previously thought.
Environmental concerns
Researchers associated with International Seabed Authority observers, including those at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and TU Delft, have examined potential environmental impacts of nodule collection and compared it to the environmental and human impact of terrestrial mining. In April 2021, scientists from JPI oceans project carried out in depth studies into mining technology and its possible effect on the seabed.
Much of what is known about the potential environmental impact is a result of a dredging pilot test conducted in 1978. In the years since the tests, the region has been monitored. Many species here are more susceptible to the negative effects of environmental shifts as change at these depths is atypical. Specifically looking at nematodes, it has been determined that there is a lower species richness and lower total biomass in the area where the dredging occurred as compared to the neighboring spaces. Additionally, the composition of species and the frequencies at which they are found change with human interference. The removal of polymetallic nodules, as proposed through deep-sea mining, would decrease suitable habitat as many species of nematodes reside within the upper five centimeters where nodules exist, too. Even those species that do remain will face changes to their habitat conditions as the new top layer of sediment after the removal of the nodules will be significantly denser. The low sedimentation levels and minimal currents show that disruption in the CCZ would have long-lasting effects on the environment; the upturned sediment remains unsettled even decades later.
In addition, Seabed mining may lead to prolonged impact to the nodule provinces. Polymetallic nodules in the CCZ grow extremely slowly, at rates of approximately 1–10 millimeters per million years. Polymetallic nodules are classified in three morphologies, smooth (S-type), rough (R-type), and mixed (S–R) . Their formation is conditioned by a combination of metal supply, availability of nuclei, benthic currents, sediment–water interface conditions, biological mixing (bioturbation), and internal stratigraphic layering, which makes it difficult to reproduce quickly. The species directly dependent on them, and all of their subsequent linkages or environmental functions would see vast changes that could not be quickly restored after the damage is complete. Beyond direct physical contact with equipment, organisms may be affected by sediment plumes, change in resource availability, and noise and light pollution associated with mining operations; the latter effect remain largely unknown.
Some scholars have raised environmental concerns regarding legal and governance issues in the CCZ. While UNCLOS requires that activities in the Area provide "effective protection" of the marine environment, the ISA simultaneously administers mineral development and environmental protection. Surveys of extensive undescribed biodiversity and environmental effects have led some commentators and governments to argue that the current ecological baselines are limited. Accompanied with ongoing debates over draft mining regulations, implementation of environmental thresholds, and the role of precaution in the ISA's decision-making processes, mining activities remain controversial at the CCZ.

Clay is a type of fine-grained natural soil material containing clay minerals (hydrous aluminium phyllosilicates, e.g. kaolinite, Al2Si2O5(OH)4). Most pure clay minerals are white or light-coloured, but natural clays show a variety of colours from impurities, such as a reddish or brownish colour from small amounts of iron oxide.
Clays develop plasticity when wet but can be hardened through firing. Clay is the longest-known ceramic raw material. Prehistoric humans discovered the useful properties of clay and used it for making pottery. Some of the earliest pottery shards have been dated to around 14,000 BCE, and clay tablets were the first known writing medium. Clay is used in many modern industrial processes, such as paper making, cement production, and chemical filtering. Between one-half and two-thirds of the world's population live or work in buildings made with clay, often baked into brick, as an essential part of its load-bearing structure. In agriculture, clay content is a major factor in determining land arability. Clay soils are generally less suitable for crops due to poor natural drainage; however, clay soils are more fertile, due to higher cation-exchange capacity.
Clay is a very common substance. Shale, formed largely from clay, is the most common sedimentary rock. Although many naturally occurring deposits include both silts and clay, clays are distinguished from other fine-grained soils by differences in size and mineralogy. Silts, which are fine-grained soils that do not include clay minerals, tend to have larger particle sizes than clays. Mixtures of sand, silt and less than 40% clay are called loam. Soils high in swelling clays (expansive clay), which are clay minerals that readily expand in volume when they absorb water, are a major challenge in civil engineering.
Properties
The defining mechanical property of clay is its plasticity when wet and its ability to harden when dried or fired. Clays show a broad range of water content within which they are highly plastic, from a minimum water content (called the plastic limit) where the clay is just moist enough to mould, to a maximum water content (called the liquid limit) where the moulded clay is just dry enough to hold its shape. The plastic limit of kaolinite clay ranges from about 36% to 40% and its liquid limit ranges from about 58% to 72%. High-quality clay is also tough, as measured by the amount of mechanical work required to roll a sample of clay flat. Its toughness reflects a high degree of internal cohesion.
Clay has a high content of clay minerals that give it its plasticity. Clay minerals are hydrous aluminium phyllosilicate minerals, composed of aluminium and silicon ions bonded into tiny, thin plates by interconnecting oxygen and hydroxide ions. These plates are tough but flexible, and in moist clay, they adhere to each other. The resulting aggregates give clay the cohesion that makes it plastic. In kaolinite clay, the bonding between plates is provided by a film of water molecules that hydrogen bond the plates together. The bonds are weak enough to allow the plates to slip past each other when the clay is being moulded, but strong enough to hold the plates in place and allow the moulded clay to retain its shape after it is moulded. When the clay is dried, most of the water molecules are removed, and the plates form direct hydrogen bonds with each other, making the dried clay rigid but still fragile. If the clay is moistened again, it will once more become plastic. When the clay is fired to the earthenware stage, a dehydration reaction removes additional water from the clay, causing clay plates to irreversibly adhere to each other via stronger covalent bonding, which strengthens the material. The clay mineral kaolinite is transformed into a non-clay material, metakaolin, which remains rigid and hard if moistened again. Further firing through the stoneware and porcelain stages further recrystallizes the metakaolin into yet stronger minerals such as mullite.
The tiny size and plate form of clay particles gives clay minerals a high surface area. In some clay minerals, the plates carry a negative electrical charge that is balanced by a surrounding layer of positive ions (cations), such as sodium, potassium, or calcium. If the clay is mixed with a solution containing other cations, these can swap places with the cations in the layer around the clay particles, which gives clays a high capacity for ion exchange. The chemistry of clay minerals, including their capacity to retain nutrient cations such as potassium and ammonium, is important to soil fertility.
Clay is a common component of sedimentary rock. Shale is formed largely from clay and is the most common of sedimentary rocks. However, most clay deposits are impure. Many naturally occurring deposits include both silts and clay. Clays are distinguished from other fine-grained soils by differences in size and mineralogy. Silts, which are fine-grained soils that do not include clay minerals, tend to have larger particle sizes than clays. There is, however, some overlap in particle size and other physical properties. The distinction between silt and clay varies by discipline. Geologists and soil scientists usually consider the separation to occur at a particle size of 2 μm (clays being finer than silts), sedimentologists often use 4–5 μm, and colloid chemists use 1 μm. Clay-size particles and clay minerals are not the same, despite a degree of overlap in their respective definitions. Geotechnical engineers distinguish between silts and clays based on the plasticity properties of the soil, as measured by the soils' Atterberg limits. ISO 14688 grades clay particles as being smaller than 2 μm and silt particles as being larger. Mixtures of sand, silt and less than 40% clay are called loam.
Some clay minerals (such as smectite) are described as swelling clay minerals, because they have a great capacity to take up water, and they increase greatly in volume when they do so. When dried, they shrink back to their original volume. This produces distinctive textures, such as mudcracks or "popcorn" texture, in clay deposits. Soils containing swelling clay minerals (such as bentonite) pose a considerable challenge for civil engineering, because swelling clay can break foundations of buildings and ruin road beds.
Agriculture
Clay is generally considered undesirable for agriculture, although some amount of clay is a necessary component of good soil. Compared to other soils, clay soils are less suitable for crops due to their tendency to retain water, and require artificial drainage and tillage to make suitable for planting. However, clay soils are often more fertile and can hold onto nutrients better due to their higher cation-exchange capacity, allowing more land to remain in production rather than being left fallow. As clay tends to retain nutrients for longer before leaching them, this also means plants may require more fertilizer in clay soils.
Formation
Clay minerals most commonly form by prolonged chemical weathering of silicate-bearing rocks. They can also form locally from hydrothermal activity. Chemical weathering takes place largely by acid hydrolysis due to low concentrations of carbonic acid, dissolved in rainwater or released by plant roots. The acid breaks bonds between aluminium and oxygen, releasing other metal ions and silica (as a gel of orthosilicic acid).)
The clay minerals formed depend on the composition of the source rock and the climate. Acid weathering of feldspar-rich rock, such as granite, in warm climates tends to produce kaolin. Weathering of the same kind of rock under alkaline conditions produces illite. Smectite forms by weathering of igneous rock under alkaline conditions, while gibbsite forms by intense weathering of other clay minerals.
There are two types of clay deposits: primary and secondary. Primary clays form as residual deposits in soil and remain at the site of formation. Secondary clays are clays that have been transported from their original location by water erosion and deposited in a new sedimentary deposit. Secondary clay deposits are typically associated with very low energy depositional environments such as large lakes and marine basins.
Varieties
The main groups of clays include kaolinite, montmorillonite-smectite, and illite. Chlorite, vermiculite, talc, and pyrophyllite are sometimes also classified as clay minerals. There are approximately 30 different types of "pure" clays in these categories, but most "natural" clay deposits are mixtures of these different types, along with other weathered minerals. Clay minerals in clays are most easily identified using X-ray diffraction rather than chemical or physical tests.
Varve (or varved clay) is clay with visible annual layers that are formed by seasonal deposition of those layers and are marked by differences in erosion and organic content. This type of deposit is common in former glacial lakes. When fine sediments are delivered into the calm waters of these glacial lake basins away from the shoreline, they settle to the lake bed. The resulting seasonal layering is preserved in an even distribution of clay sediment banding.
Quick clay is a unique type of marine clay indigenous to the glaciated terrains of Norway, North America, Northern Ireland, and Sweden. It is a highly sensitive clay, prone to liquefaction, and has been involved in several deadly landslides.
Uses
Modelling clay is used in art and handicraft for sculpting. Clays are used for making pottery, both utilitarian and decorative, and construction products, such as bricks, walls, and floor tiles. Different types of clay, when used with different minerals and firing conditions, are used to produce earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain. Prehistoric humans discovered the useful properties of clay. Some of the earliest pottery shards recovered are from central Honshu, Japan. They are associated with the Jōmon culture, and recovered deposits have been dated to around 14,000 BCE. Cooking pots, art objects, dishware, smoking pipes, and even musical instruments such as the ocarina can all be shaped from clay before being fired.
Ancient peoples in Mesopotamia adopted clay tablets as the first known writing medium. Clay was chosen due to the local material being easy to work with and widely available. Scribes wrote on the tablets by inscribing them with a script known as cuneiform, using a blunt reed called a stylus, which effectively produced the wedge shaped markings of their writing. After being written on, clay tablets could be reworked into fresh tablets and reused if needed, or fired to make them permanent records. Nowadays, clay is added as a filler to graphite, in pencil lead, to change the hardness and blackness of the pencil. Purpose-made clay balls were used as sling ammunition. Clay is used in many industrial processes, such as paper making, cement production, and chemical filtering. Bentonite clay is widely used as a mold binder in the manufacture of sand castings.
Materials
Clay is a common filler used in polymer nanocomposites. It can reduce the cost of the composite, as well as impart modified behavior: increased stiffness, decreased permeability, decreased electrical conductivity, etc.
Medicine
Traditional uses of clay as medicine go back to prehistoric times. An example is Armenian bole, which is used to soothe an upset stomach. Some animals such as parrots and pigs ingest clay for similar reasons. Kaolin clay and attapulgite have been used as anti-diarrheal medicines.
Construction
Clay as the defining ingredient of loam is one of the oldest building materials on Earth, among other ancient, naturally occurring geologic materials such as stone and organic materials like wood. Between one-half and two-thirds of the world's population, in both traditional societies as well as developed countries, still live or work in buildings made with clay, often baked into brick, as an essential part of their load-bearing structure. Also a primary ingredient in many natural building techniques, clay is used to create adobe, cob, cordwood, and structures and building elements such as wattle and daub, clay plaster, clay render case, clay floors and clay paints and ceramic building material. Clay was used as a mortar in brick chimneys and stone walls where protected from water.
Clay, relatively impermeable to water, is also used where natural seals are needed, such as in pond linings, the cores of dams, or as a barrier in landfills against toxic seepage (lining the landfill, preferably in combination with geotextiles). Studies in the early 21st century have investigated clay's absorption capacities in various applications, such as the removal of heavy metals from waste water and air purification.

Clay chemistry is an applied subdiscipline of chemistry which studies the chemical structures, properties and reactions of or involving clays and clay minerals. It is a multidisciplinary field, involving concepts and knowledge from inorganic and structural chemistry, physical chemistry, materials chemistry, analytical chemistry, organic chemistry, mineralogy, geology and others.
The study of the chemistry (and physics) of clays and clay minerals is of great academic and industrial relevance as they are among the most widely used industrial minerals, being employed as raw materials (ceramics, pottery, etc.), adsorbents, catalysts, additives, mineral charges, medicines, building materials and others.
The unique properties of clay minerals including: nanometric scale layered construction, presence of fixed and interchangeable charges, possibility of adsorbing and hosting (intercalating) molecules, ability of forming stable colloidal dispersions, possibility of tailored surface and interlayer chemical modification and others, make the study of clay chemistry a very important and extremely varied field of research.
Many distinct fields and knowledge areas are impacted by the physico-chemical behavior of clay minerals, from environmental sciences to chemical process engineering, from pottery to nuclear waste management.
Their cation exchange capacity (CEC) is of great importance in the balance of the most common cations in soil (Na+, K+, NH4+, Ca2+, Mg2+) and pH control, with direct impact on the soil fertility. It also plays an important role in the fate of most Ca2+ arriving from land (river water) into the seas.
The ability to change and control the CEC of clay minerals offers a valuable tool in the development of selective adsorbents with applications as varied as chemical sensors or pollution cleaning substances for contaminated water, for example.
The understanding of the reactions of clay minerals with water (intercalation, adsorption, colloidal dispersion, etc.) are indispensable for the ceramic industry (plasticity and flow control of ceramic raw mixtures, for example). Those interactions also influence a great number of mechanical properties of soils, being carefully studied by building and construction engineering specialists.
The interactions of clay minerals with organic substances in the soil also plays a vital role in the fixation of nutrients and fertility, as well as in the fixation or leaching of pesticides and other contaminants. Some clay minerals (kaolinite) are used as carrier material for fungicides and insecticides.
The weathering of many rock types produce clay minerals as one of its last products. The understanding of these geochemical processes is also important for the understanding of geological evolution of landscapes and macroscopic properties of rocks and sediments. Presence of clay minerals in Mars, detected by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter in 2009 was another strong evidence of the existence of water on the planet in previous geological eras.
The possibility to disperse nanometric scaled clay mineral particles into a matrix of polymer, with the formation of an inorganic-organic nanocomposite has prompted a large resurgence in the study of these minerals from the late 1990s.
In addition, study of clay chemistry is also of great relevance to the chemical industry, as many clay minerals are used as catalysts, catalyst precursors or catalyst substrates in a number of chemical processes, like automotive catalysts and oil cracking catalysts.

A clay court is one of the types of tennis court on which the sport of tennis is played. Clay courts are built on a foundation of crushed stone, particularly limestone, shale, and other aggregate, with a thin layer of fine clay particles on top. Clay courts are more common in Continental Europe and Latin America than in North America, Asia-Pacific, or Britain. The only Grand Slam tournament that uses clay courts is the French Open.
Clay courts come in the more common red clay, a distinctive color obtained from the superior layer of thin crushed brick, and the slightly harder green clay, which is actually crushed metabasalt. Although slightly less expensive to construct than other types of tennis courts, clay requires much maintenance: the surface must be watered and rolled regularly to preserve texture and flatness, and brushed carefully before and during each match.
Early history
Clay courts, although now commonly associated with continental Europe, were said to be the creation of the English tennis player William Renshaw (a seven times Wimbledon champion) and his twin brother Ernest. The Renshaws had built a grass court at their summer home on the French Riviera, but found it unable to withstand prolonged exposure to heat and sunlight. To remedy this, in 1890 William Renshaw decided that the court should be covered with a fine powder that would protect it from the sun's rays. This powder was sourced from discarded terracotta discovered at a small ceramics factory in Vallauris, near Cannes, where the brothers regularly purchased decorative pots for their garden. Success with the new surface came quickly: after only a year or two, it was reported that 104 clay courts had been built in Cannes alone. Brick powder soon replaced the Vallauris terracotta pots, as the factory could not keep up with this eruption in demand.
Courts covered in a top layer of brick dust thereafter became the norm in many Mediterranean and South American countries, as they are not only durable in summer but do not need to be tended and mowed, unlike grass courts (although they do require regular maintenance involving rolling, "dragging", and occasional watering). Yet further improvements were still imperative, as the bounce on these courts was often irregular, the surface dried slowly after rain had fallen, and the courts could not be used in winter months for fear of damage. In 1909, the newly-established Leicestershire firm En-Tout-Cas (translated roughly into English as "in all conditions") came up with a prototype court made from crushed brick and burnt shale that could drain much more quickly than standard clay courts. These proved very popular once offered as a product, and by the 1920s the company was responsible for laying clay courts for the Davis Cup and at the French, British and Canadian Championships. During the following decade the American engineer H. A. Robinson went still further, creating a surface based on classic clay augmented with green piled metabasalt rock, which he hoped would help deliver a more consistent bounce. This became known as Har-Tru, derived from Robinson's initials and the 'true' nature of the bounce experienced on the court. First used in Hagerstown, Maryland, in 1932, green Har-Tru clay soon became the preferred surface for American clay court tournaments. In later years, the Har-Tru company would go on to develop all-weather clay surfaces at its factory in Charlottesville, Virginia, that could be played on throughout the entire year.
Variants
Red clay
Almost all red clay courts are now made not of natural clay but of crushed brick that is packed to make the court, with the top most layers consisting of finely crushed loose particles. Such courts are most common in Europe and Latin America. The exact color of the surface varies with the composition of the bricks used, and can appear from a light yellow to a deep red.
Natural clay courts are rare because this type of surface does not absorb water easily and takes two to three days to dry. A good example of natural red clay can be seen at the Frick Park Clay Courts in Pittsburgh, a public facility of six red clay courts that has been in continual use since 1930.
Sports surface providers such as En-Tout-Cas still offer red clay surfaces with a coarser top layer to improve drainage. These courts are particularly popular in southern Australian states such as Victoria, where the phrase 'En-Tout-Cas' is a common generic shorthand for a clay court.
In Britain, where En-Tout-Cas is based, most red clay courts have a surface dressing of burnt shale (with or without brick) for drainage purposes. However, shale courts are now comparatively rare, having been steadily replaced in many clubs by all-weather synthetic surfaces (including artificial clay). The few courts that remain tend to be found in industrial areas such as central Scotland and Lancashire, as shale – known as blaes in Scotland – is a constituent element of colliery waste and thus can be easily and cheaply sourced in such locations. Shale 'clay' courts tend to be a lighter shade of red than their European counterparts, and the gritty texture of the surface means that the ball does not slow down as quickly as it does on powdery continental clay.
Aside from crushed brick and shale, other surfaces have also been used as a substitute for natural red clay. In Queensland and New South Wales, courts made from crushed ant hill mounds (known as "ant bed" or "dirt" courts) can occasionally be found; these are similar in appearance to standard red clay courts, as the ant hill "loam" or grit is pinky-brown in color. Top Australian competitors such as Mal Anderson, Roy Emerson and Rod Laver, who all grew up in Queensland, practiced on ant bed courts when they were young. Courts made out of crushed seashells, which create a gritty, sand-like surface, are common in the Philippines.
Green clay
Green clay, also known by brand names such as Har-Tru and Rubico, is made of crushed metabasalt rather than brick, making the surface slightly harder and faster than red clay. These courts are located primarily in the mid-Atlantic and southern United States. They are also found in Central and Eastern Canada. There is one WTA tournament played on green Har-Tru clay courts, the Charleston Open in Charleston, South Carolina. From 1975 until 1977, the US Open was played on Har-Tru clay courts.
The US Men's Clay Court Championships are played on clay that has a maroon color. Not only is this a darker color than other clay courts used in the professional game, but it is also a type of Har-Tru court, meaning it is actually composed of the same substance (basalt) as green clay courts, and not a type of red clay. Har-Tru market this kind of court as "American red clay".
Play
Clay courts are considered "slow" because the balls bounce relatively high and lose much of their initial speed when contacting the surface, making it more difficult for a player to deliver an unreturnable shot. Points are usually longer as there are fewer winners. Clay courts favor baseliners who are consistent and have a strong defensive game, leading to players such as Rafael Nadal, Björn Borg, Chris Evert, and Justine Henin finding success at the French Open. Players who excel on clay courts but struggle to replicate the same form on fast courts are known as clay-court specialists (or, more pejoratively, as "dirtballers"). Clay-court players generally play in a semicircle about 1.5 to 3 metres (5 to 10 feet) behind the baseline. Clay courts favor the "full western grip" for more topspin. Clay court players use topspins to throw off their opponents.
Movement on the loose surface is very different from movement on any other surface, often involving sliding toward the incoming ball while preparing for the return stroke.
Clay courts are unique in that the ball bounce leaves an impression in the ground, which can help determine whether a shot was in or out. Furthermore, clay courts are still playable in light rain because the courts are meant to be slightly wet when played on and the surface absorbs water better than hard courts and grass courts. This is opposed to hard courts and grass courts where play is usually suspended almost immediately during even light rain.
Players
In the pre-open era Anthony Wilding is particularly notable for his achievements on clay courts. Starting in May 1910 at the Championship of South Africa and ending in June 1914 at the World Hard Court Championships he registered 120 consecutive clay court match victories.
Rafael Nadal, winner of a record 14 French Open men's singles titles, is noted for his success on clay; since his debut in 2005, he only lost four times at the tournament – in 2009, 2015, 2021 and 2024. Nadal holds the record for the longest winning streak by any male player on a single surface since the Open Era began in 1968: 81 clay court wins between April 2005 and May 2007. He also holds the record for most clay court titles in the Open Era, with 63. Guillermo Vilas won 49 of his 62 singles titles on clay. He only won a single French Open title, although he also won the US Open in 1977 while it was held on clay. Thomas Muster is also considered a successful clay court player; although he also only won the French Open once, 40 out of his 44 career singles titles were won on clay. Other notable players who had significant success on clay include Ivan Lendl and Björn Borg – the former winning the French Open in 1984, 1986, and 1987, while the latter won it 6 times.
While often overshadowed by Nadal's clay successes due to being contemporaries, Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic also were known for being extremely formidable on clay courts throughout their careers and had significant successes. Federer made the final of the French Open 5 times, including every year from 2006 to 2009, finally winning the last one in the sequence, while Djokovic has won the title 3 times (2016, 2021, 2023), beating Nadal en route to the title in 2021, while making it to the final an additional 4 times on top of that. Federer is also notable for ending Nadal's 81 match win streak on clay courts at the 2007 Hamburg Masters.
On the women's side, Monica Seles, Justine Henin and Iga Swiatek hold the open era record for the number of consecutive French Open titles won at three (1990–1992 for Seles, 2005–2007 for Henin and 2022–2024 for Swiatek). In the pre-open era this feat was first achieved by Helen Wills Moody (1928–1930) and followed by Hilde Krahwinkel Sperling (1935–1937).
Chris Evert holds the record for longest winning streak on clay for either gender in the open era: from August 1973 to May 1979, she won 125 consecutive clay court matches. During this time, Evert skipped three editions of the French Open (1976–78), to participate in World Team Tennis. She also has the highest career win percentage on clay courts (94.55%) during the open era.
The most successful currently active female player on clay is Iga Świątek, who won the French Open in 2020, 2022, 2023, and 2024. In 2022 and 2024, Świątek won three titles and lost only one match on clay.
Clay-court specialist
A clay-court specialist is a tennis player who excels on clay courts, more than on any other surface.
Due in part to advances in racquet technology, current clay-court specialists are known for employing long, winding groundstrokes that generate heavy topspin; such strokes are less effective on faster surfaces on which the balls do not bounce as high. Clay-court specialists tend to slide more effectively on clay than other players. Many of them are also very adept at hitting the drop shot, which can be effective because rallies on clay courts often leave players pushed far beyond the baseline. Additionally, the slow, long rallies require a great degree of mental focus and physical stamina.
The definition of "clay-court specialist" has varied. Anthony Wilding, Sergi Bruguera, Albert Costa and Gastón Gaudio were French Open champions who won all or nearly all of their career titles on clay. Andrés Gimeno, Adriano Panatta, Manuel Orantes, Yannick Noah, Michael Chang, Thomas Muster, Gustavo Kuerten, Carlos Moyá and Juan Carlos Ferrero won major titles only on clay, but won lower tournaments, including Masters Series events, on other surfaces. Among female players, there have been few whose best results were confined exclusively to clay. Virginia Ruzici, Anastasia Myskina, Iva Majoli, Sue Barker, Ana Ivanovic, Francesca Schiavone and Jeļena Ostapenko are the only female players to have won major titles at only the French Open since the beginning of the open era.
Increasingly, clay courters have attempted to play better on other surfaces, with some success. Ferrero reached the final of the US Open in 2003, the same year he won the French Open, and also won several hardcourt tournaments. Nadal was considered a clay court specialist until a string of successes on other surfaces—including completing a Double Career Grand Slam and a Career Golden Slam—led to a broadening of his reputation. 2016 French Open winner Garbiñe Muguruza reached the 2015 Wimbledon final and won the 2017 Wimbledon title.
Professional tournaments played on clay
The professional clay court season comprises many more tournaments than the brief grass court season, but is still shorter than the hard court seasons. There are three distinct clay court seasons during the year.
The first is the men's South American clay season. Played primarily in February between the Australian Open and the Indian Wells Masters, the ATP has four tournaments in this swing, although other ATP tournaments played on hardcourt occur the same weeks. The WTA discontinued its participation in Rio de Janeiro after 2016, so there are no clay court women's tournaments during this period.
The second is the long spring clay season that starts in the Americas and Morocco before moving to mainland Europe and finishing with the French Open. It is usually played over two months between April and June, after the Miami Open. Unlike the other two clay seasons, this swing does not share the majority of its time with simultaneous hard court tournaments.
The third is the brief summer clay season that takes place after Wimbledon. It is entirely in Europe, and usually takes place in July. Near the end of the swing, it overlaps with the beginning of the US Open Series.
South American clay season
Spring clay season
Summer clay season

Clay pipe dating is the act of dating clay tobacco pipes found at archaeological sites to specific time periods.
Clay pipes are a useful archaeological dating tool because, during the historical period when they were in use, they were a common and breakable item and therefore they are frequently found at archeological sites. In addition, variations in their features make them highly dateable objects.
Originally clay pipes were dated by their morphology, through examination of the pipe's bowl and the maker's mark. The first comprehensive studies were detailed by Adrian Oswald in 1951. In 1954, archaeologist J. C. Harrington developed a method of dating pipe stems to specific time periods. This method was later developed upon by Lewis Binford, Lee Hanson Jr. and Robert Heighton and Kathleen A. Deagan.
Origins of clay pipe dating
Originally, clay pipes were dated through the examination of the bowl of the pipe rather than the stem. In 1951, Adrian Oswald published a study of English clay tobacco types, upon which all successive studies were based upon. Oswald showed how, over time, the bowls of pipes increased, as did the angle at which the bowl was attached to the stem of the pipe. In a later study, Oswald created a variety of comprehensive drawings on bowl shapes of English pipes throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, using the dates of the archaeological sites the bowls were found at in order to date them.
Bowls were also dated using the maker's marks which provide a relatively accurate date. Oswald created a detailed list of pipe makers, their marks and the dates in which they were creating pipes across the United Kingdom. The location of maker's marks can also help contribute to dating efforts. The typical placement of marks changed over the 17th century from the bottom of the bowl to the spur and the heel. In the 18th century, marks were additionally placed on the back of the bowl. These changes all allowed for dating of pipes prior to the invention of dating formulas, and can still be used instead of the formulaic methods popularised today.
Harrington's time periods
Clay pipe stems were first used as a dating tool beginning in 1954, when archaeologist J.C Harrington realised that the imported English white clay tobacco pipe stem fragments found in archaeological sites across Virginia changed over time, following a general trend wherein the bore diameter of the stem over the course of the 17th to the 18th century.
This led Harrington to identify five time periods between the years 1620-1800 to which pipes could be dated based upon the decrease in the bore diameter of the clay pipe stem. Harrington only used English pipe stems and noted that the accuracy of this dating method was only accurate for pipes created before 1800. He also stated that ten or more fragments within a sample size would be needed to use this method. Despite these stipulations, three formulaic methods of dating were developed based on Harrington's time periods: Binford's linear formula, Hanson's formulas and the Heighton and Deagan Formula.
Binford's linear formula
Binford's linear formula was developed by Lewis Binford in 1962. It enables the calculation of the date of a clay pipe sample from the diameter of its stem.
This equation is only effective on samples up to the year of 1780 when white clay pipes began being manufactured in America, and imitated earlier styles. Other requirements for its effectiveness are that the samples must be random, representative of the site and that the sites the samples are from must have a constant rate of deposition.
This method is the most commonly used for clay pipe dating.
Hanson's regression formulas
In 1968, archaeologist Lee Hanson Jr. created a series of regression formulas based on the averages of each of Harrington's time periods and Binford's dates. This allowed entire archeological sites to be dated based on clay pipe stem fragments found at the site.
Each of Hanson's formulas has a time range, with researchers having to choose a time bracket (e.g. 1650-1710) based on their hypothesis of the dates of the site. Like Binford's linear formula, they rely on using the bore diameter of the pipe stem to find the mean date of the data sample.
Heighton and Deagan's formula
Robert Heighton and Kathleen Deagan introduced a third method for dating pipe stems in 1971. This was developed by measuring 26 stems from 14 different sites dated from 1635 to 1775 and producing a two-step formula based on the mean date of these results. This added methodological sophistication by using a logarithmic formula in the first step and a point of origin formula in the second.

A clay pit is a quarry or mine for the extraction of clay, which is generally used for manufacturing pottery, bricks or Portland cement. Quarries where clay is mined to make bricks are sometimes called brick pits.
A brickyard or brickworks is often located alongside a clay pit to reduce the transport costs of the raw material. Today, pottery producers are often not sited near the source of their clay and usually do not own the clay deposits. In these industries, the other essential raw material is fuel for firing and potteries may be located near to fuel sources.
Former claypits are sometimes filled with water and used for recreational purposes such as sailing and scuba diving. The Eden Project at Bodelva near St Austell, Cornwall, UK is a major redevelopment of a former china clay (kaolin) pit for educational and environmental purposes.

Clay-water interaction is an all-inclusive term to describe various progressive interactions between clay minerals and water. In the dry state, clay packets exist in face-to-face stacks like a deck of playing cards, but clay packets begin to change when exposed to water. Five descriptive terms describe the progressive interactions in a clay-water system.
(1) Hydration occurs as clay packets absorb water and swell.
(2) Dispersion (or disaggregation) causes clay platelets to break apart and disperse into the water due to the loss of attractive forces as water moves the platelets further apart.
(3) Flocculation begins when mechanical shearing stops, and platelets previously dispersed come together due to the attractive force of surface charges on the platelets.
(4) Deflocculation, or peptization, the opposite effect, occurs when a chemical de-flocculant is added to flocculated mud; the positive edge charges are covered, and attraction forces are greatly reduced.
(5) Aggregation, a result of ionic or thermal conditions, alters the hydrational layer around clay platelets, removes the deflocculant from positive edge charges, and allows platelets to assume a face-to-face structure.

In archaeology, a cleaver is a type of biface stone tool of the Lower Palaeolithic.
Cleavers resemble hand axes in that they are large and oblong or U-shaped tools meant to be held in the hand. But, unlike hand axes, they have a wide, straight cutting edge running at right angles to the axis of the tool.
Acheulean cleavers resemble handaxes but with the pointed end truncated away. Flake cleavers have a cutting edge created by a tranchet flake being struck from the primary surface.
Differences between cleavers and hand axes
Cleavers, found in many Acheulean assemblages such as Africa, were similar in size and manner of hand axes. The differences between a hand axe and a cleaver is that a hand axe has a more pointed tip, while a cleaver will have a more transverse "bit" that consists of an untrimmed portion of the edge oriented perpendicular to the long axis of the tool. These were used in lithic technology. It is unclear if it was used for heavy digging or not. More experiments were shown that the cleaver in Africa was more used as a butchering instrument. They were also helpful in skinning large game, and breaking bones.
Cleavers in Africa
In Africa, cleavers first appeared from the late Oldowan to the Acheulean. In Peninj on the western shore of Lake Notron, cleavers constitute 16% of all findings.
One type of cleaver made in Africa was formed by the Tavelbala Tachengit technique. This procedure was used in the north-west Sahara desert. It was done by detachment of large flakes for biface manufacture. This was a significant technological advance because the cleavers normally produced were made on large flakes, which was impossible to produce with using the nodular flint of the size used on the European continent. Once the large flakes were detached, there were only minor modifications needed to get the desired end product that is now known as the flake-cleaver. There are collections of these flakes in the Institute of Human Paleontology in Paris. They include larger hand axes and smaller hand axes ranging from 6–26 cm, and large flake cleavers that were commonly found in this area.
Another way to make the tools was known as the "Victoria West" technique, termed by Goodwin in 1934. This process was used in the Middle Pleistocene of South Africa, and was the chosen method of producing large flakes that was used to create cleavers. This production date was between 285 k.A BP to 510 k.a. BP.
Cleavers in Europe
Outside Africa where cleavers were most abundant, cleavers have appeared in Southwestern Europe. In these regions, they are more abundant than hand axes where raw material occurs in the form of large quartzite cobbles that do not need extensive decortication and shaping prior to the removal of large flakes. Cleavers can also be found made from different raw materials such as flint or limestone, but these are not nearly so common.
There is also a chronological gap between the two lithic assemblages of the early core and flake techniques to the later Acheulian. Central France shows that both of these existed. One of the cleavers found in Central France was a 20 cm long cleaver. This particular one was found in the Mazieres/ Cresuse Valley, and looks slightly different from the cleavers which were found in Africa based solely on the technique used at this time period.
Cleavers in Asia
This tool type is known from various Lower Paleolithic sites across western Asia and Indian subcontinent. There are a few examples found in China too.

Clifton Furnace is a historic cold blast charcoal furnace located near Clifton Forge, Alleghany County, Virginia. It was built in 1846 of large, rough-hewn, rectangular stones. It measures 34 feet square at the base and the sides and face taper towards the top. The furnace went out of blast in 1854 and was revamped in 1874. It was abandoned in 1877.
It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1982.

A cloth filter is a simple and cost-effective appropriate technology method for reducing the contamination of drinking water, developed for use mainly in Bangladesh. Water collected in this way has a greatly reduced pathogen count. Though not always perfectly safe, it is an improvement for poor people with limited options.
Filtering water to free it from micro-organisms has been an age-old practice among Jains who carefully remove the micro-organisms in the cloth through filtered water in order to follow doctrine of Ahimsa or non-violence, preventing pain to any living creature.
Method
The method used in Bangladesh is as follows: cloth is folded to make four or eight layers and the folded cloth is placed over a wide-mouthed container used to collect surface water. After use, it is usually sufficient to rinse the cloth and dry it in the sun for a couple of hours. In the monsoon seasons, it may be advisable to use a cheap disinfectant to decontaminate the material.
The preferred cloth is used cotton sari cloth. Other types of clean, used cloth can be used with some effect, though the effectiveness will vary significantly. Used cloth is more effective than new cloth, as the repeated washing reduces the space between the fibers.
Effectiveness
The cloth is effective because most pathogens are attached to particles and plankton, particularly a type of zooplankton called copepods, within the water. By passing the water through an effective filter, most cholera bacteria and other pathogens are removed. It has been demonstrated to greatly reduce cholera infections in poor villages where disinfectants and fuel for boiling are difficult to get.
In sub-Saharan Africa where guinea worm infections (dracunculiasis) are endemic, infection is prevented by use of a nylon mesh with pore size of approximately 150 μm to filter out the copepods that host the parasite.
An old folded cotton sari creates a smaller effective mesh size (approximately 20-μm). This should be small enough to remove all zooplankton, most phytoplankton, and thus a large proportion of the cholera in the water (99%, according to laboratory studies). However, the nylon net with the larger mesh size was found to be "almost equally effective."
The cloth filter provides less than ideal purification on its own - usually filtering is an initial step, to be followed by further disinfection. However, where there are no other options, water professionals may consider that it is "of course, better than nothing"
Background
The cloth filter has been studied and reported on by Rita Colwell and Anwar Huq from the University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, together with other researchers from the United States and Bangladesh. They report that: "It is common practice in villages in Bangladesh to use cloth, frequently a flat, unfolded piece of an old sari, to filter home-prepared drinks".
The researchers studied the application of this technique to drinking water, with folded cloth. They studied the pore size of the cloth, the effect of folding the cloth on the effective pore size, the ability of the cloth to remove particles and plankton, as well as the effect on rates of cholera when used in a Bangladesh village.

Cob, cobb, or clom (in Wales) is a natural building material made from subsoil, water, fibrous organic material (typically straw), and sometimes lime. The contents of subsoil vary, and if it does not contain the right mixture, it can be modified with sand or clay. Cob is fireproof, termite proof, resistant to seismic activity, and uses low-cost materials, although it is very labour intensive. It can be used to create artistic and sculptural forms, and its use has been revived in recent years by the natural building and sustainability movements.
In technical building and engineering documents, such as the Uniform Building Code of the western United States, cob may be referred to as "unburned clay masonry," when used in a structural context. It may also be referred to as "aggregate" in non-structural contexts, such as "clay and sand aggregate," or more simply "organic aggregate," such as where cob is a filler between post and beam construction.
History and usage
Cob is an English term attested to around the year 1600 for an ancient building material that has been used for building since prehistoric times. The use of this material in Iran is more than 4000 years old. The etymology of cob and cobbing is unclear, but in several senses means to beat or strike, which is how cob material is applied to a wall.
Many similar materials and methods of earthen building are used around the world, such as adobe, lump clay, puddled clay, chalk mud, wychert, clay daubins, swish (Asante Twi), torchis (French), bauge (French), bousille (French mud with moss), beaten clay-pahsa (Central Asia), and cat and clay.
Cob structures can be found in a variety of climates across the globe. European examples include:
in England, notably in the counties of Devon and Cornwall in the West Country, and in East Anglia (where it is referred to as clay lump)
in Wales, notably in rural Anglesey
in Donegal Bay in Ulster and in Munster, South-West Ireland
in Finisterre and Ille-et-Vilaine in Brittany, where many homes have survived over 500 years and are still inhabited
Some of the oldest human-made structures in Afghanistan are composed of rammed earth and cob. Cobwork (tabya) was used in the Maghreb and al-Andalus in the 11th and 12th centuries, and was described in detail by Ibn Khaldun in the 14th century.
Many old cob buildings can be found in Africa, the Middle East, and the southwestern United States like the Taos Pueblo. A number of cob cottages survive from mid-19th-century New Zealand.
Traditionally, English cob was made by mixing the clay-based subsoil with sand, straw and water using oxen to trample it. English soils contain varying amounts of chalk, and cob made with significant amounts of chalk are called chalk cob or wychert. The earthen mixture was then ladled onto a stone foundation in courses and trodden onto the wall by workers in a process known as cobbing. The construction would progress according to the time required for the prior course to dry. After drying, the walls would be trimmed and the next course built, with lintels for later openings such as doors and windows being placed as the wall takes shape.
The walls of a cob house are generally about 24 inches (61 cm) thick, and windows were correspondingly deep-set, giving the homes a characteristic internal appearance. The thick walls provided excellent thermal mass which was easy to keep warm in winter and cool in summer. Walls with a high thermal mass value act as a thermal buffer inside the home. The material has a long life-span even in rainy or humid climates, provided a tall foundation and large roof overhang are present.
Cob is fireproof, while "fire cob" (cob without straw or fiber) is a refractory material (the same material, essentially, as unfired common red brick), and historically, has been used to make chimneys, fireplaces, forges and crucibles. Without fiber, however, cob loses most of its tensile strength.
Modern cob buildings
When Kevin McCabe constructed a two-story, four bedroom cob house in England, UK in 1994, it was reputedly the first cob residence built in the country in 70 years. His techniques remained very traditional; the only innovations he made were using a tractor to mix the cob and adding sand or shillet, a gravel of crushed shale, to reduce shrinkage.
From 2002 to 2004, sustainability enthusiast Rob Hopkins initiated the construction of a cob house for his family, the first new one in Ireland in circa one hundred years. It was a community project, but an unidentified arsonist destroyed it shortly before completion. The house, located at The Hollies Centre for Practical Sustainability in County Cork, was being rebuilt as of 2010. There are a number of other completed modern cob houses and more are planned, including a public education centre.
In 2000-01, a modern, four bedroom cob house in Worcestershire, England, UK, designed by Associated Architects, was sold for £999,000. Cobtun House was erected in 2001 and won the Royal Institute of British Architects' Sustainable Building of the Year award in 2005. The total construction cost was £300,000, but the metre (yard) thick outer cob wall cost only £20,000.
In the Pacific Northwest of the United States there has been a resurgence of cob construction, both as an alternative building practice and one desired for its form, function, and cost effectiveness. Pat Hennebery, Tracy Calvert, Elke Cole, and the Cobworks workshops erected more than ten cob houses in the Southern Gulf Islands of British Columbia, Canada.
In 2010, Sota Construction Services in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States, completed construction on its new 7,500 square foot corporate headquarters, which featured exterior cob walls along with other energy saving features like radiant heat flooring, a rooftop solar panel array, and daylighting. The cob walls, in conjunction with the other sustainable features, enabled the edifice to earn a LEED Platinum rating in 2012, and it also received one of the highest scores by percentage of total points earned in any LEED category.
In 2007, Ann and Gord Baird began constructing a two-storey cob house in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, for an estimated $210,000 CDN. The home of 2,150 square feet includes heated floors, solar panels, and a southern exposure to enable passive solar heating.
Welsh architect Ianto Evans and researcher Linda Smiley refined the construction technique known as "Oregon Cob" in the 1980s and 1990s. Oregon Cob integrates the variation of wall layup technique which uses loaves of mud mixed with sand and straw with a rounded architectural stylism. They are experimenting with a mixture of cob and straw bale denominated "balecob".
Cob building code
In 2019 an appendix for the International Residential Code (IRC) was approved by a vote in the public comment hearings. Appendix U of the IRC governs use of cob in load-bearing walls of single story residential structures. Based on currently available test data, the appendix limits the conditions under which cob may be used without engineering approval, such as seismic activity.

College of the Redwoods (CR) is a public community college with its main campus south of Eureka, California, United States. It is part of the California Community Colleges System and serves three counties. It has two branch campuses, as well as three additional sites. It is one of twelve community colleges in California that offer on-campus housing for students.
In autumn of 2022, the school had 3,891 students of which 1,211 were full-time. The school uses "a semester-based academic year". With a student-faculty ratio of 16-to-1, the school offers associate degrees. The school "has an open admissions policy and offers credit for life experiences".
According to U.S. News, "the in-state tuition and fees for 2020-2021 were $1,147, and out-of-state tuition and fees were $8,539. There is no application fee."
History
The original Redwoods Community College District was formed in 1964 by a vote of the people of Humboldt County. Founding President Eugene J. Portugal and his wife Dottie Portugal shaped the look of the campus. In 1975, residents of the coastal portion of Mendocino County voted to join the District, and in 1978 Del Norte County similarly joined. The college serves these areas, as well as a portion of Trinity County.
In 2012, College of the Redwoods' regional accreditor Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges (ACCJC) placed the college on "Show Cause" status, warning the college that its accreditation might be withdrawn. Two years later it removed the college from probation and reaffirmed its accreditation.
Finances
Beginning with the passage of Proposition 13 by California in 1978, College of the Redwoods and most public institutions in the state have suffered declining revenue. This has continued following the Dot-Com Bust. Simultaneously the college suffered increasing costs due to inflation, population growth, and increasingly unfunded state and federal mandates. In 2006, voters passed Bond Measure Q/B (Ballot Measure Q in Humboldt, northwest Mendocino and western Trinity counties; Ballot Measure B in Del Norte County) to allow issuance of $40,320,000 in bond funding to upgrade and renovate facilities at the main campus south of Eureka and the branch campuses in Crescent City and Fort Bragg. Measure Q Bond Funds were also used to acquire the Garberville Site in Southern Humboldt County.
Academics
College of the Redwoods awards Associate of Arts and Associate of Science Degrees as well as a wide variety of career technical certificates for vocational and professional development. Degrees or certificates are available in 54 fields of study, the most popular are Biological and Physical Sciences, Humanities/Humanistic Studies, and Liberal Arts and Sciences/Liberal Studies.
Satellite campuses
College of the Redwoods (CR) has satellite branch campuses; CR Del Norte in Crescent City, Del Norte County and the Klamath-Trinity Instructional Site on the Hoopa Valley Tribe reservation. Adult Education and Workforce and Community Education programs are through the Eureka, California downtown site. It also runs classes at the College of the Redwoods' Certified Organic Farm in Shively, California. CR serves incarcerated students at Pelican Bay State Prison.
Administration
The college is part of the Redwoods Community College District, itself part of the California Community Colleges System. The district is governed by an elected seven-member Board of Trustees.
Notable alumni
Mike Bettiga (born 1950), professional football player
Ashley Eriksmoen, (class of 1998), furniture maker and educator
Dave Harper, (class of 1986), professional football player
Bryan Malessa (class of 1993), novelist
Michael Moore, saxophonist and clarinetist, member of the Instant Composers Pool
John James Nazarian (born 1952), celebrity private investigator
Randy Niemann, (class of 1975), professional baseball player
Jason Romero, (class of 1999), Banjo luthier and Juno award-winning performer
Carmelita Little Turtle (born 1952), Apache/Rarámuri photographer
Points of interest
Humboldt Botanical Garden

Community forestry is a participatory model of forestry that gained prominence in the 1970s in which local communities take an active role in forest management and land use decision making. Community forestry is defined by the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations as "any situation that intimately involves local people in forestry activity". Unlike centralized management systems, community forestry more strongly emphasizes the participation and collaboration of local community stakeholders, along with government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The level of involvement of each of these groups is dependent on the specific community forest project, the management system and the region.
Examples of community forestry have existed throughout history and exist today across South Asia, Africa, Latin America, and parts of Europe, often integrating traditional ecological knowledge with modern management. These initiatives are recognized for their contributions to climate resilience, forest regeneration, and socio-economic development. Many projects aim to protect community livelihoods, enhance resource access, reduce poverty, or promote sustainable land management, however, these initiatives can face many challenges in practice.
History
Community forestry is a branch of forestry that deals with the communal management of forests for generating income from timber and non-timber forest products on one hand, and managing for ecosystem services such as watershed conservation, carbon sequestration and aesthetic values on the other hand. It has been considered one of the most promising options of combining forest conservation with rural development, community empowerment and poverty reduction objectives.
The concept of community forestry first came to prominence in the mid-1970s but is rooted in historical land management systems that prioritized collective stewardship. For example, in pre-colonial Africa, community-managed forests served as critical sources of food, medicine, and cultural heritage, governed through traditional norms and local leadership structures. Similarly, before enclosure or other land privatization efforts, European commons allowed communities to access forests for grazing, fuelwood, and construction materials under shared use. Around the world, colonial governance and widespread land privatization disrupted these practices by replacing communal systems with centralized or private control. In regions such as India, colonial forestry policies prioritized timber extraction and commercial gains, often displacing indigenous communities and undermining traditional knowledge. This widespread alienation of local populations from forest resources led to widespread degradation and social unrest, prompting calls for reform in Africa and other continents.
The re-emergence of community forestry in the 20th century was driven by growing recognition of the ecological and social failures of centralized forest policy efforts. Early movements, such as India’s Joint Forest Management in the 1970s and Nepal’s Forest User Groups in the 1980s, attempted to improve the management of forest resources and address environmental issues due to the countries failing centralized forest policy. These early efforts illustrated the potential of participatory governance to address resource depletion and empower marginalized communities. In 1978, FAO’s seminal work, Forestry for Local Community Development, laid the foundation for integrating scientific forestry with traditional practices in the modern period, arguing that empowering local communities not only conserved resources but also improved socio-economic outcomes. More recently, in the past few decades, community forestry has been implemented in developing countries and has been modestly successful in its aims of sustainable forest management, climate change adaptation, and securing socio-economic benefits for local communities.
However, a study by the Overseas Development Institute has shown that the technical, managerial and financial requirements stipulated by community forestry frameworks are often incompatible with local realities and interests. A successful legal and institutional framework must incorporate the strengthening of existing institutions and enable the dissemination of locally appropriate practices as well as the local capacity for regulation and control. In practice, successful models have combined adaptive management with community-driven initiatives. For example, Mexico’s community forest enterprises (CFEs) demonstrated that decentralized governance could generate substantial economic benefits while maintaining ecological integrity. Similarly, Nepal’s participatory forest management made progress in reducing poverty and restoring forest cover.
As of 2016, FAO estimated that almost one-third of the world's forest area is under some form of community-based management.
Principles and goals
Governance
Governance in community forestry emphasizes decentralization and participatory decision-making. Models such as Nepal’s Forest User Groups show how local empowerment can lead to improved conservation outcomes and equitable resource distribution. These groups operate democratically, with elected committees overseeing forest management, benefit-sharing, and conflict resolution.
Other governance systems include co-management frameworks, as seen in Brazil’s Amazon. These systems involve partnerships between local communities, NGOs, and government agencies to balance conservation goals with socio-economic development. However, successful governance requires transparent processes, capacity-building, and mechanisms to address power imbalances between partners.
Land tenure
Land tenure is a fundamental aspect of community forestry, affecting whether communities have the rights and security to invest in sustainable practices. In Mozambique, community forestry laws have helped formalize tenure arrangements, enabling local groups to manage forests and participate in carbon trading markets. However, challenges such as unclear boundaries, elite capture, and weak enforcement persist in many land tenure systems, threatening the viability of community forestry projects and creating uncertainty in terms of resource access.
The history of informal land tenure systems and land privatization must be addressed for community forestry projects to be successful. In Latin America, Mexico’s ejido system provides a notable example of how collective tenure arrangements can support long-term resource management and economic development. By granting legal recognition to community-managed lands, the system fosters stability and investment in sustainable forestry.
Sustainability and resilience
Sustainability in community forestry involves balancing ecological, social, and economic goals. Effective initiatives incorporate biodiversity conservation, sustainable harvesting practices, and equitable benefit-sharing. For example, Nepal’s community forestry programs have successfully regenerated forest areas while supporting local livelihoods, demonstrating resilience in the face of environmental and economic challenges. Projects like Mozambique’s carbon forestry initiatives also highlight the role of community forestry in enhancing resilience to climate change by promoting afforestation and reforestation efforts.
Stakeholders
There are a large variety of stakeholders involved in community forestry. Stakeholders of community forestry have a vested interest in establishing sustainable practices, whether this be to develop and maintain a regular income, ensure that forests are sufficiently protected to ensure their longevity and reduce illegal activities, or to manage the area in such a way to promote tourism and conservation. Participation by stakeholders from the community, government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) is essential in a project's success.
Communities and local users
Communities are central to community forestry, with their participation ensuring that management practices reflect local priorities. Communities may have local or indigenous knowledge that can positively influence the stewardship of forest ecosystems and resources. Interestingly, faith communities are increasingly participating in efforts to promote ecological sustainability.
Faith communities
Whereas the last 50–100 years have seen faith communities lease out their territory to industry, they are beginning to reclaim and restore their land. There have been several highly successful efforts across Cambodia, which have been extended to Vietnam and Laos. In September 2010, Buddhists monks were awarded the UNDP's Equator Prize for their ongoing conservation work. This comprises the establishment of tree nurseries, seedling distribution, ordination activities, composting schemes and a vegetable garden, which is used to promote sustainable living and conservation. The site has become a valuable source of information and environmental education as well as a base for the local community. Villagers regularly hold panel discussions about how they can go on to best take advantage of what the natural forest has to offer without destroying it.
Governments and institutions
Governments provide essential legal frameworks and resources for community forestry. For example, Indonesia’s Hutan Desa program enables communities to manage forests under state supervision, promoting conservation while addressing rural poverty. However, institutional weaknesses, such as bureaucratic delays and limited capacity, often hinder implementation.
NGOs and international organizations
NGOs and international organizations play a vital role in advocating for community rights and providing technical support. For example, in the Philippines, NGO-facilitated projects have empowered communities to restore degraded lands while generating income through agroforestry and ecotourism. FAO’s work in documenting and disseminating best practices has also been instrumental in shaping global policy and capacity-building efforts.
Common stakeholders
While specific stakeholders vary between different community forestry projects common stakeholder groups are summarized in the following table.
Management systems and theory
Management systems
Due to differing complex regional socio-economic and environmental contexts, there is no blueprint management plan for community forestry projects. However, some variables have been observed to affect the success of community forest management systems, grouped by one study into the following five categories:
attributes of the resource system,
attributes of the user group,
attributes of the governance system,
attributes relating to interactions between the user group and resource, and
attributes relating to interactions between the governance system and the resource.
It has also been suggested that community conflict within community forest management may also be mitigated by the following approach:
Management by smaller work groups within the community, sharing common interest in the resources.
A clear management plan with specific benefit sharing arrangement within the work group.
Develop management systems which are within the expertise of the working group.
Adaptive management has also been emphasized in community forestry literature. Participatory governance frameworks, such as Mexico’s CFEs, Nepal’s Forest User Groups, and Portugal's community forest management practices demonstrate how adaptive management can address diverse ecological and socio-economic needs. These models emphasize inclusivity, transparency, and accountability, fostering long-term success.
Role of incentives
Incentives play a crucial role in encouraging communities to participate in and sustain forestry initiatives. They can be broadly categorized into those focused on household use and those aimed at developing market-oriented forestry.
Household use incentives
Household use incentives can include the following.
Preserving the source of community's livelihood - Community forestry ensures the preservation of forests as vital sources of livelihood. Forests provide essential resources such as food, fuel, and construction materials while supporting agricultural productivity through soil stabilization.
Maintaining soil integrity by preventing erosion - Forest cover helps maintain soil integrity by reducing erosion and improving water retention, which is critical for sustaining agricultural practices and protecting local ecosystems.
Use of fuel wood and fodder – Planting trees to provide fuel wood as well as fodder for cattle can be encouraged in ways that do not conflict with cash crops and food production. For example, the Neem tree was introduced in West Africa and is now the most widely grown tree in the drier parts of the continent. It was easily cultivated and provides the farmers with good timber, fuel and shade.
Developing nursery networks - Subsidized programs that support the establishment of local nurseries encourage entrepreneurship among community members. By producing planting stock for sale, these nurseries provide economic opportunities and contribute to reforestation efforts.
Market incentives
Forestry can take on the character of agricultural production where there is a market for wood products such as poles, fuel wood and, pulp for production of paper, or where there is a market for non-timber forest products.
Timber and Wood Products - Community forestry initiatives often integrate tree cultivation with local and regional markets. For example, in the Philippines, over 3,000 farmers grow trees specifically for pulp production under agreements with industries. These arrangements provide a steady source of income by guaranteeing minimum prices for their products.
Non-timber Forest Products - Cooperatives like the Village Forestry Associations in South Korea enable communities to collectively produce and market forest products such as timber and mushrooms.
Aligning household and market incentives is central to community forestry management systems, and has potential to foster economic growth, ecological sustainability, and social cohesion.
Benefits
Socio-economic benefits
Community forestry has been recognized for its potential to generate profound socio-economic benefits, particularly for marginalized, forest-dependent populations. By granting communities access and rights to forest resources, it creates opportunities for employment, income generation, and poverty alleviation.
In Nepal, Forest User Groups have enabled equitable benefit-sharing, ensuring that marginalized groups, such as women and lower-caste individuals, gain access to forest-derived incomes. These groups often reinvest revenues into community infrastructure, such as schools, water systems, and renewable energy projects, fostering broader socio-economic development.
In Mexico, community forest enterprises (CFEs) not only generate significant economic returns through timber production but also invest in local job creation, housing, and education programs. These enterprises demonstrate how sustainable resource use can contribute to regional economic stability and resilience.
In the Philippines, community-managed agroforestry projects have helped restore degraded lands while providing communities with steady incomes from crops such as coffee, cacao, and fruits. These initiatives illustrate the potential of integrating forestry with agricultural livelihoods.
Environmental benefits
Community forestry also contributes to global environmental goals including reducing deforestation, enhancing biodiversity, and promoting carbon sequestration. Reforestation initiatives in Nepal have reversed decades of forest loss, with some regions witnessing a 37% increase in forest cover under community management.
In Africa, Mozambique’s community forestry initiatives play a dual role in biodiversity conservation and climate change mitigation. By participating in carbon trading schemes, communities gain financial incentives to conserve forests, thereby reducing emissions from deforestation.
Latin America offers further evidence of environmental success, with Brazil’s co-managed forests in the Amazon acting as biodiversity hotspots while supporting sustainable livelihoods. These systems integrate local ecological knowledge with scientific management to enhance resilience against climate change and forest degradation.
Challenges
Research suggests that there are still major challenges for community forestry in practice. Some of the major challenges are outlined below.
Governance and institutional strength
Governance challenges, such as bureaucratic inefficiency and lack of institutional capacity, often hinder the success of community forestry initiatives. In Mozambique, for instance, weak government oversight has led to inequitable benefit-sharing and insufficient support for capacity-building among local communities.
Additionally, existing power imbalances between community members, local elites, and external stakeholders can unintentionally be exacerbated by community forestry initiatives. For example, in the Amazon, co-management efforts have faced criticism for failing to adequately represent marginalized groups, such as women and indigenous populations, in decision-making processes.
Tenure and privatization
Tenure insecurity remains a critical obstacle in community forestry. Unclear boundaries, competing claims, and weak enforcement mechanisms can undermine the claims to ownership or management rights of local communities, leading to conflicts and resource overexploitation.
In regions like sub-Saharan Africa, tenure systems often lack legal recognition, exposing communities to risks of land commodification and privatization. For example, land grabs by private entities in Mozambique have displaced local communities, limiting their ability to engage in sustainable forestry.
To address these challenges, experts advocate for legal reforms that prioritize tenure security, enhance community rights, and establish conflict-resolution mechanisms.
Market access
Market-based mechanisms, such as certification systems or carbon credit projects, have enabled communities to access global markets for sustainable forest products or carbon sequestration. However, challenges such as high certification costs and limited market access remain barriers for smallholders.
Challenges in the Amazon
A study conducted in the Brazilian Amazon determined that there are a number of challenges that must be faced when developing a sustainable management strategy for community forestry. These challenges are outlined below. The study's model is segregated into two phases: the development phase during which several enabling factors (land ownership, organizational capacity, technical knowledge and capital) are needed to obtain a legal management permit and secondly the operational phase where factors (clandestine loggers, access to markets, infrastructure and managerial skills) influence the success of the management program. Each of the challenges outlined must be addressed in order for a self-sustaining community forestry management program to be established.
Case studies
Indonesia
Indonesia’s social forestry program is an integrated forest management system primarily implemented by forest farmer groups and indigenous communities. Its goals include reducing poverty, improving community welfare, and protecting forests from degradation and land conversion.
The program offers five community forestry models: community forests, village forests, community plantation forests, forestry partnerships, and customary forests, as regulated by the Forestry Act of 1999 and the Ministry of Environment and Forestry Regulation No. 9/2021 on social forestry management. Through this program, a community representative can obtain a license to manage forests within a specified tenure.
Villagers from three communities in Bantaeng district in Indonesia, with the assistance of a funded project obtained a Forest management license and secured a 35-year lease on their local forest. With the incentive to preserve their source of income, the villagers have had a positive impact on forest conservation. This is now viewed as a reference model for the Ministry of Forestry's future projects.
Korea
Farmers enter into a profit sharing contract with the 'Village Forestry Association' (VFA) to form a cooperative which assists farmers with reforestation in keeping with the legislation. VFA, though loosely linked to the Office of Forestry enjoys a degree of autonomy facilitating community participation. This system demonstrates the desirable mix of top-down and bottom-up planning ensuring government control as well as effective reforestation through active community participation.
Mexico
Mexico’s CFEs represent one of the most successful models of community forestry, blending sustainable resource management with economic development. These enterprises emphasize local governance, sustainable practices, and reinvestment in community development. By granting communities legal ownership and management rights, the program has enabled local populations to derive economic benefits from timber and non-timber forest products while conserving biodiversity. These enterprises reinvest profits into community development, creating a cycle of sustainability.
Mozambique
Mozambique’s carbon forestry projects highlight the potential of community forestry to address climate change while generating socio-economic benefits. Communities manage reforested areas, earning carbon credits that can be traded on international markets. However, challenges such as inequitable benefit-sharing and limited technical expertise underscore the need for better governance and capacity-building.
Nepal
Common land in Nepal is owned by the state while community-based 'Forest User Groups' (FUG) manage forest resources. These groups, composed of local households, are responsible for managing designated forest areas, ensuring sustainable resource use, and distributing benefits equitably. Nepal’s programs demonstrate that community forestry can simultaneously meet ecological and socio-economic goals through decentralized management. For example, the initiative has led to significant forest regeneration, increased household incomes, and strengthened social cohesion, setting a benchmark for community forestry globally.
Philippines
In the Philippines, NGO-facilitated community forestry projects combine agroforestry with ecotourism to restore degraded landscapes and provide economic opportunities. By diversifying income sources, these projects enhance community resilience and foster long-term sustainability.

Compacted oxide layer glaze describes the often shiny, wear-protective layer of oxide formed when two metals (or a metal and ceramic) are slid against each other at high temperature in an oxygen-containing atmosphere. The layer forms on either or both of the surfaces in contact and can protect against wear.
Background
A not often used definition of glaze is the highly sintered compacted oxide layer formed due to the sliding of either two metallic surfaces (or sometimes a metal surface and ceramic surface) at high temperatures (normally several hundred degrees Celsius) in oxidizing conditions. The sliding or tribological action generates oxide debris that can be compacted against one or both sliding surfaces and, under the correct conditions of load, sliding speed and oxide chemistry as well as (high) temperature, sinter together to form a 'glaze' layer. The 'glaze' formed in such cases is actually a crystalline oxide, with a very small crystal or grain size having been shown to approach nano-scale levels. Such 'glaze' layers were originally thought to be amorphous oxides of the same form as ceramic glazes, hence the name 'glaze' is still currently used.
Such 'glazes' have attracted limited attention due to their ability to protect the metallic surfaces on which they may form, from wear under the high temperature conditions in which they are generated. This high temperature wear protection allows potential use at temperatures beyond the range of conventional hydrocarbon-based, silicone-based or even solid lubricants such as molybdenum disulfide (the latter useful up to about 450 °C (842 °F) short term). Once they form, little further damage occurs unless there is a dramatic change in sliding conditions.
Such 'glazes' work by providing a mechanically resistant layer, which prevents direct contact between the two sliding surfaces. For example, when two metals slide against each other, there can be a high degree of adhesion between the surfaces. The adhesion may be sufficient to result in metallic transfer from one surface to the other (or removal and ejection of such material) - effectively adhesive wear (also referred to as severe wear). With the 'glaze' layer present, such severe adhesive interactions cannot occur and wear may be greatly reduced. The continued generation of oxidized debris during the more gradual wear that results (entitled mild wear) can sustain the 'glaze' layer and maintain this low wear regime.
However, their potential application has been hampered as they have only successfully been formed under the very sliding conditions where they are meant to offer protection. A limited amount of sliding damage (referred to as 'run in wear' - actually a brief period of adhesive or severe wear) needs to occur before the oxides are generated and such 'glaze' layers can form. Efforts at encouraging their early formation have met with very limited success, and the damage inflicted during the 'run in' period is one factor preventing this technique being used for practical applications.
As oxide generated is effectively the result of the tribochemical decay of one or both of the metallic (or ceramic) surfaces in contact, the study of compacted oxide layer glazes is sometimes referred to as part of the more general field of high temperature corrosion.
The generation of oxides during high temperature sliding wear does not automatically lead to the production of a compacted oxide layer 'glaze'. Under certain conditions (potentially due to non-ideal conditions of sliding speed, load, temperature or oxide chemistry / composition), the oxide may not sinter together and instead the loose oxide debris may assist or enhance the removal of material by abrasive wear. A change in conditions may also see a switch from the formation of a loose, abrasive oxide to the formation of wear protective compacted oxide glaze layers and vice versa, or even the reappearance of adhesive or severe wear. Due to the complexities of the conditions controlling the types of wear observed, there have been a number of attempts to map types of wear with reference to sliding conditions in order to help better understand and predict them.
Potential uses
Due to the potential for wear protection at high temperatures beyond which conventional lubricants can be used, possible uses have been speculated in applications such as car engines, power generation and even aerospace, where there is an increasing demand for ever higher efficiency and thus operating temperature.
Compacted oxide layers at low temperatures
Compacted oxide layers can form due to sliding at low temperatures and offer some wear protection; however, in the absence of heat as a driving force (either due to frictional heating or higher ambient temperature), they cannot sinter together to form more protective 'glaze' layers.

In carpentry, architecture, and shipbuilding, a compass is a curved circular form.
Examples
A compass plane is a plane that is convex, length-ways, on the underside, for smoothing the concave faces of curved woodwork.
A compass saw is a narrow-bladed saw that cuts a curve.
A compass timber is a curved (or crooked) timber, sometimes used in shipbuilding.
A compass brick is a curved brick.
A compass wall is a curved wall.
A compass window is a circular bay window.
A surveyor's compass (or circumferentor) is a measuring instrument used in surveying horizontal angles.

A conchoidal fracture is a break or fracture of a brittle material that does not follow any natural planes of separation. Mindat.org defines conchoidal fracture as follows: "a fracture with smooth, curved surfaces, typically slightly concave, showing concentric undulations resembling the lines of growth of a shell". Materials that break in this way include quartz, chert, flint, quartzite, jasper, and other fine-grained or amorphous materials with a composition of pure silica, such as obsidian and window glass, as well as a few metals, such as solid gallium.
Crystalline materials such as quartz also exhibit conchoidal fractures when they lack a cleavage plane and do not break along a plane parallel to their crystalline faces. Hence, a conchoidal or uneven fracture is not a specific indication of the amorphous character of a mineral, or a material. Amorphous, cryptocrystalline, and crystalline materials can all present conchoidal fracture when they lack a preferential cleavage plane.
Conchoidal fractures can occur in various materials if they are properly percussed (struck). Cryptocrystalline silica, such as chert, or flint, with this material property were widely sought after, traded, and fashioned into sharp tools in the Stone Age.
Conchoidal fractures often result in a curved breakage surface that resembles the rippling, gradual curves of a mussel shell; the word "conchoid" is derived from the word for this animal (Ancient Greek: κογχοειδής konchoeidēs < κόγχη konchē). A swelling appears at the point of impact called the bulb of percussion. Shock waves emanating outwards from this point leave their mark on the stone as ripples. Other conchoidal features include small fissures emanating from the bulb of percussion.
They are defined in contrast to the faceted fractures often seen in single crystals such as semiconductor wafers and gemstones and to the high-energy ductile fracture surfaces desirable in most structural applications.
Subsets
Several subdefinitions exist, for instance on the Webmineral website:
Brittle—conchoidal: very brittle fracture producing small, conchoidal fragments
Brittle—subconchoidal: brittle fracture with subconchoidal fragments
Conchoidal—irregular: irregular fracture producing small, conchoidal fragments
Conchoidal—uneven: uneven fracture producing small, conchoidal fragments
Subconchoidal: fractures developed in brittle materials characterized by semi-curving surfaces
Lithics
In lithic stone tools, conchoidal fractures form the basis of flint knapping, since the shape of the broken surface is controlled only by the stresses applied, and not by some preferred orientation of the material. This property also makes such fractures useful in engineering, since they provide a permanent record of the stress state at the time of failure. As conchoidal fractures can be produced only by mechanical impact, rather than frost cracking for example, they can be a useful method of differentiating prehistoric stone tools from natural stones.

Construction aggregate, or simply aggregate, is a broad category of coarse to medium-grained particulate material used in construction. Traditionally, it includes natural materials such as sand, gravel, and crushed stone. As with other types of aggregates, it is a component of composite materials, particularly concrete and asphalt.
Aggregates are the most mined materials in the world, being a significant part of the 6 billion tons of concrete produced per year.
Aggregate serves as reinforcement to add strength to the resulting material.
Due to the relatively high hydraulic conductivity as compared to most soil types, aggregates are widely used in drainage applications such as foundation and French drains, septic drain fields, retaining wall drains, and roadside edge drains. Aggregates are also used as base material under building foundations, roads and railroads (aggregate base). It has predictable, uniform properties, preventing differential settling under the road or building.
Aggregates are also used as a low-cost extender that binds with more expensive bitumen to form asphalt concrete or with Portland cement to form concrete.
Self-binding aggregate refers to angular crushed material (quarrystone rubble) comprising a mixture of finer and coarser particles that interlock after being compacted.
More recently, recycled concrete, steel and carbon fibres as well as geosynthetic materials have also been used as aggregates.

A continuous cooling transformation (CCT) phase diagram is often used when heat treating steel. These diagrams are used to represent which types of phase changes will occur in a material as it is cooled at different rates. These diagrams are often more useful than time-temperature-transformation diagrams because it is more convenient to cool materials at a certain rate (temperature-variable cooling), than to cool quickly and hold at a certain temperature (isothermal cooling).
Types of continuous cooling diagrams
There are two types of continuous cooling diagrams drawn for practical purposes.
Type 1: This is the plot beginning with the transformation start point, cooling with a specific transformation fraction and ending with a transformation finish temperature for all products against transformation time for each cooling curve.
Type 2: This is the plot beginning with the transformation start point, cooling with specific transformation fraction and ending with a transformation finish temperature for all products against cooling rate or bar diameter of the specimen for each type of cooling medium..

Cooking, also known as cookery, is the art, science and craft of using heat to make food more palatable, digestible, nutritious, or safe. Cooking techniques and ingredients vary widely, from grilling food over an open fire, to using electric stoves, to baking in various types of ovens, to boiling and blanching in water, reflecting local conditions, techniques and traditions. Cooking is an aspect of all human societies and a cultural universal.
Types of cooking also depend on the skill levels and training of the cooks. Cooking is done both by people in their own dwellings and by professional cooks and chefs in restaurants and other food establishments. The term "culinary arts" usually refers to cooking that primarily focuses on the aesthetic presentation and taste of food.
Preparing food with heat or fire is an activity unique to humans. Archaeological evidence of cooking fires dates to at least 300,000 years ago, but some estimate that humans started cooking as early as 2 million years ago.
The expansion of agriculture, commerce, trade, and transportation between civilizations in different regions offered cooks many new ingredients. New inventions and technologies, such as the invention of pottery for holding and boiling of water, expanded cooking techniques. Some modern cooks apply advanced scientific techniques to food preparation to enhance further the flavor of the dish served.
History
Phylogenetic analysis suggests that early hominids may have adopted cooking 1–2 million years ago. Re-analysis of burnt bone fragments and plant ashes from the Wonderwerk Cave in South Africa has provided evidence supporting control of fire by early humans 1 million years ago. In his seminal work Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human, Richard Wrangham suggested that evolution of bipedalism and a large cranial capacity meant that early Homo habilis regularly cooked food. However, unequivocal evidence in the archaeological record for the controlled use of fire begins at 400,000 BCE, much later than the period species like Homo erectus are thought to have lived. Archaeological evidence from 300,000 years ago, in the form of ancient hearths, earth ovens, burnt animal bones, and flint, are found across Europe and the Middle East. The oldest evidence (via heated fish teeth from a deep cave) of controlled use of fire to cook food by archaic humans was dated to ~780,000 years ago. Anthropologists think that widespread cooking fires began about 250,000 years ago when hearths first appeared.
Recently, the earliest hearths have been reported to be at least 790,000 years old.
Communication between the Old World and the New World in the Columbian Exchange influenced the history of cooking. The movement of foods across the Atlantic from the New World, such as potatoes, tomatoes, maize, beans, bell pepper, chili pepper, vanilla, pumpkin, cassava, avocado, peanut, pecan, cashew, pineapple, blueberry, sunflower, chocolate, gourds, green beans, and squash, had a profound effect on Old World cooking. The movement of foods across the Atlantic from the Old World, such as cattle, sheep, pigs, wheat, oats, barley, rice, apples, pears, peas, chickpeas, mustard, and carrots, similarly changed New World cooking.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, food was a classic marker of identity in Europe. In the 19th-century "Age of Nationalism", cuisine became a defining symbol of national identity.
Ilaria Porciani notes that the consequences of industrial food manufacturing, such as McDonald's and other fast-food places, created a desire for authentic cuisine. She argues that food becomes entangled with nostalgia and is imagined in terms of authenticity and tradition, thereby representing continuity with past generations. In this way, food undergoes heritagization. In the 19th and 20th centuries, food became part of a larger process of defining national identity, which can be seen as an informal 'contract' between those who assign heritage status and the people. National intellectuals and folklorists shaped this process by researching national traditions and fostering a sense of national unity. Governments, public institutions, cooks, and gourmets also participated in this informal contract of building a culinary identity for the nation.
The Industrial Revolution brought mass production, mass marketing, and standardization of food. Factories processed, preserved, canned, and packaged a wide variety of foods, and processed cereals quickly became a defining feature of the American breakfast. In the 1920s, freezing methods, cafeterias, and fast food restaurants emerged.
Ingredients
Most ingredients in cooking are derived from living organisms. Vegetables, fruits, grains, and nuts, as well as herbs and spices come from plants, while meat, eggs, and dairy products come from animals. Mushrooms and the yeast used in baking are kinds of fungi. Cooks also use water and minerals such as salt. Cooks can also use wine or spirits.
Naturally occurring ingredients contain various amounts of molecules called proteins, carbohydrates and fats. They also contain water and minerals. Cooking involves manipulating the chemical properties of these molecules.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates include the common sugar, sucrose (table sugar), a disaccharide, and such simple sugars as glucose (made by enzymatic splitting of sucrose) and fructose (from fruit), and starches from sources such as cereal flour, rice, arrowroot and potato.
The interaction of heat and carbohydrate is complex. Long-chain sugars such as starch tend to break down into more digestible simpler sugars. If the sugars are heated so that all water of crystallisation is driven off, caramelization starts, with the sugar undergoing thermal decomposition with the formation of carbon, and other breakdown products producing caramel. Similarly, the heating of sugars and proteins causes the Maillard reaction, a basic flavor-enhancing technique.
An emulsion of starch with fat or water can, when gently heated, thicken the dish being cooked. In European cooking, a mixture of butter and flour called a roux is used to thicken liquids, such as stews and sauces. In Asian cooking, a similar effect is obtained from a mixture of rice or corn starch and water. These techniques rely on the properties of starches to create simpler mucilaginous saccharides during cooking, which causes the familiar thickening of sauces. This thickening will, however, break down under additional heat.
Fats
Types of fat include vegetable oils, animal products such as butter and lard, as well as fats from grains, including maize and flax oils. Fats are used in many ways in cooking and baking. To prepare stir-fries, grilled cheese, or pancakes, the pan or griddle is often coated with fat or oil. Fats are also used as an ingredient in baked goods such as cookies, cakes, and pies. Fats can reach temperatures above the boiling point of water and are often used to transfer high heat to other ingredients, such as in frying, deep-frying, or sautéing. Fats are used to add flavor to food (e.g., butter or bacon fat), prevent food from sticking to pans, and create a desirable texture.
Fats are one of the three main macronutrient groups in human diet, along with carbohydrates and proteins, and the main components of common food products like milk, butter, tallow, lard, salt pork, and cooking oils. They are a major and dense source of food energy for many animals and play important structural and metabolic functions, in most living beings, including energy storage, waterproofing, and thermal insulation. The human body can produce the fat it requires from other food ingredients, except for a few essential fatty acids that must be included in the diet. Dietary fats are also the carriers of some flavor and aroma ingredients and vitamins that are not water-soluble.
Proteins
Edible animal material, including muscle, offal, milk, eggs and egg whites, contains substantial amounts of protein. Almost all vegetable matter (in particular legumes and seeds) also includes proteins, although generally in smaller amounts. Mushrooms have high protein content. Any of these may be sources of essential amino acids. When proteins are heated they become denatured (unfolded) and change texture. In many cases, this causes the material to become softer or more friable – meat becomes cooked and is more friable and less flexible. In some cases, proteins can form more rigid structures, such as the coagulation of albumen in egg whites. The formation of a relatively rigid yet flexible matrix from egg white is an important component in baking cakes and underpins many desserts based on meringue.
Water
Cooking often involves water and water-based liquids. These can be added to immerse the ingredients being cooked (typically water, stock, or wine). Alternatively, the foods themselves can release water. A favorite method of adding flavor to dishes is to save the liquid for use in other recipes. Liquids are so important to cooking that the name of the cooking method used is often based on how the liquid is combined with the food, as in steaming, simmering, boiling, braising, and blanching. Heating liquid in an open container results in rapidly increased evaporation, which concentrates the remaining flavor and ingredients; this is a critical component of both stewing and sauce making.
Vitamins and minerals
Vitamins and minerals are required for normal metabolism; and what the body cannot manufacture itself must come from external sources. Vitamins come from several sources including fresh fruit and vegetables (Vitamin C), carrots, liver (Vitamin A), cereal bran, bread, liver (B vitamins), fish liver oil (Vitamin D) and fresh green vegetables (Vitamin K). Many minerals are also essential in small quantities, including iron, calcium, magnesium, sodium chloride, and sulfur; and in very small quantities, copper, zinc, and selenium. The micronutrients, minerals, and vitamins in fruit and vegetables may be destroyed or eluted by cooking. Vitamin C is especially prone to oxidation during cooking and may be destroyed by protracted cooking. The bioavailability of some vitamins such as thiamin, vitamin B6, niacin, folate, and carotenoids are increased with cooking by being freed from the food microstructure. Blanching or steaming vegetables is a way of minimizing vitamin and mineral loss in cooking.
Methods
There are many methods of cooking, most of which have been known since antiquity. These include baking, roasting, frying, grilling, barbecuing, smoking, boiling, steaming, and braising. A more recent innovation is microwaving. Various methods use differing levels of heat and moisture and vary in cooking time. The method chosen greatly affects the result. Some major hot cooking techniques include:
Roasting
Roasting – Barbecuing – Grilling/Broiling – Rotisserie – Searing
Baking
Baking – Blind-baking
Boiling
Boiling – Blanching – Braising – Coddling – Double steaming – Infusion – Poaching – Pressure cooking – Simmering – Smothering – Steaming – Steeping – Stewing – Stone boiling – Vacuum flask cooking
Frying
Frying – Air frying — Deep frying – Gentle frying – Hot salt frying – Hot sand frying – Pan frying – Pressure frying – Sautéing – Shallow frying – Stir frying – Vacuum frying
Steaming
Steaming works by continuously boiling water, which vaporizes into steam; the steam then transfers heat to the food, cooking it. Many consider it a healthy form of cooking, as it helps retain nutrients in the vegetables or meat being cooked.
En papillote – The food is placed in a pouch and then baked, allowing its own moisture to steam it.
Smoking
Smoking is the process of flavoring, cooking, or preserving food by exposing it to smoke from burning or smoldering material, most often wood.
Sous vide
Sous vide is a method of cooking where the food is placed into a plastic pouch or glass jar which is then sealed (often in a vacuum) and cooked in a water bath at precise temperatures for longer than normal cooking times, sometimes up to days.
Health and safety
Indoor air pollution
As of 2021, over 2.6 billion people cook with open fires or inefficient stoves that use kerosene, biomass, and coal as fuel. These cooking practices use fuels and technologies that produce high levels of household air pollution, causing 3.8 million premature deaths annually. Of these deaths, 27% are from pneumonia, 27% from ischaemic heart disease, 20% from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 18% from stroke, and 8% from lung cancer. Women and young children are disproportionately affected, since they spend the most time near the hearth.
Security while cooking
Hazards while cooking can include:
Unseen slippery surfaces (such as from oil stains, water droplets, or items that have fallen on the floor)
Cuts; about a third of the US's estimated annual 400,000 knife injuries are kitchen-related.
Burns or fires
To prevent those injuries, safety measures include heat-resistant clothing, anti-slip shoes, a fire extinguisher, and more.
Food safety
Cooking can prevent many foodborne illnesses that would otherwise occur if raw food is consumed. When heat is used in the preparation of food, it can kill or inactivate harmful organisms, such as bacteria and viruses, as well as various parasites such as tapeworms and Toxoplasma gondii. Food poisoning and other illness from uncooked or poorly prepared food may be caused by bacteria such as pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium and Campylobacter, viruses such as noroviruses, and protozoa such as Entamoeba histolytica. Bacteria, viruses, and parasites may be introduced through salad, meat that is uncooked or done rare, and unboiled water.
The sterilizing effect of cooking depends on temperature, cooking time, and the technique used. Some food spoilage bacteria, such as Clostridium botulinum or Bacillus cereus, can form spores that survive cooking or boiling, which then germinate and regrow after the food has cooled. This makes it unsafe to reheat cooked food more than once.
Cooking increases the digestibility of many foods that are inedible or poisonous when raw. For example, raw cereal grains are hard to digest, while kidney beans are toxic when raw or improperly cooked due to the presence of phytohaemagglutinin, which is inactivated by cooking for at least ten minutes at 100 °C (212 °F).
Food safety depends on the safe preparation, handling, and storage of food. Food spoilage bacteria proliferate in the "Danger zone" temperature range from 40 to 140 °F (4 to 60 °C); therefore, food should not be stored in this temperature range. Washing of hands and surfaces, especially when handling different meats, and keeping raw food separate from cooked food to avoid cross-contamination, are good practices in food preparation. Foods prepared on plastic cutting boards may be less likely to harbor bacteria than wooden ones. Washing and disinfecting cutting boards, especially after use with raw meat, poultry, or seafood, reduces the risk of contamination.
Effects on nutritional content of food
Proponents of raw foodism argue that cooking food increases the risk of certain detrimental effects on food or health. They point out that when cooking vegetables and fruits rich in vitamin C, the vitamin leaches into the cooking water and is degraded by oxidation. Peeling vegetables can also substantially reduce vitamin C content, especially in potatoes, where most of the vitamin C is in the skin. However, research has shown that in the specific case of carotenoids, a greater proportion is absorbed from cooked vegetables than from raw vegetables.
Sulforaphane, a glucosinolate breakdown product, is present in vegetables such as broccoli, and is mostly destroyed when the vegetable is boiled. Although there has been some basic research on how sulforaphane might exert beneficial effects in vivo, there is no high-quality evidence for its efficacy against human diseases.
The United States Department of Agriculture has studied retention data for 16 vitamins, 8 minerals, and alcohol for approximately 290 foods across various cooking methods.
Carcinogens and AGEs
In a human epidemiological analysis by Richard Doll and Richard Peto in 1981, diet was estimated to account for a large proportion of cancers. Studies suggest that around 32% of cancer deaths may be avoidable by changes to the diet. Some of these cancers may be caused by carcinogens in food generated during the cooking process, although it is often difficult to identify the specific components in diet that serve to increase cancer risk.
Several studies published since 1990 indicate that cooking meat at high temperature creates heterocyclic amines (HCA's), which are thought to increase cancer risk in humans. Researchers at the National Cancer Institute found that human subjects who ate beef rare or medium-rare had less than one-third the risk of stomach cancer than those who ate beef medium-well or well-done. While avoiding meat or eating meat raw may be the only ways to avoid HCA's in meat fully, the National Cancer Institute states that cooking meat below 212 °F (100 °C) creates "negligible amounts" of HCA's. Also, microwaving meat before cooking may reduce HCAs by 90% by reducing the time needed for the meat to be cooked at high heat. Nitrosamines are found in some food, and may be produced by some cooking processes from proteins or from nitrites used as food preservatives; cured meat such as bacon is carcinogenic, with links to colon cancer. Ascorbate, which is added to cured meat, however, reduces nitrosamine formation.
Baking, grilling, or broiling food, especially starchy foods, until a toasted crust is formed generates significant concentrations of acrylamide. This discovery in 2002 led to international health concerns. Subsequent research has, however, found that it is not likely that the acrylamides in burnt or well-cooked food cause cancer in humans; Cancer Research UK categorizes the idea that burnt food causes cancer as a "myth".
Cooking food at high temperatures may create advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) that are believed to be involved in several diseases, including diabetes, chronic kidney disease, cancer, and cardiovascular diseases, as well as in aging. AGEs are a group of compounds that are formed between reducing sugars and amino acids via Maillard reaction. These compounds impart colors, tastes, and smells specific to these foods but may also be deleterious to health. Dry heat (e.g. in roasting or grilling) can significantly increase the production of AGEs, as well as food rich in animal protein and fats. The production of AGEs during cooking can be significantly reduced by cooking in water or other moist heat, by reducing cooking times and temperatures, and by marinating the meat in acidic ingredients such as lemon juice and vinegar beforehand.
Scientific aspects
The scientific study of cooking has become known as molecular gastronomy. This is a subdiscipline of food science concerning the physical and chemical transformations that occur during cooking.
Important contributions have been made by scientists, chefs and authors such as Hervé This (chemist), Nicholas Kurti (physicist), Peter Barham (physicist), Harold McGee (author), Shirley Corriher (biochemist, author), Robert Wolke (chemist, author.) It is different for the application of scientific knowledge to cooking, that is "molecular cooking" (for the technique) or "molecular cuisine" (for a culinary style), for which chefs such as Raymond Blanc, Philippe and Christian Conticini, Ferran Adria, Heston Blumenthal, Pierre Gagnaire (chef).
Chemical processes central to cooking include hydrolysis (in particular beta elimination of pectins, during the thermal treatment of plant tissues), pyrolysis, and glycation reactions wrongly named Maillard reactions.
Cooking food with heat depends on many factors: the specific heat of an object, thermal conductivity, and (perhaps most significantly) the temperature difference between the two objects. Thermal diffusivity is the combination of specific heat, conductivity, and density that determines how long it will take for the food to reach a certain temperature.
Home-cooking and commercial cooking
Home cooking has traditionally been a process carried out informally in a home or around a communal fire, and can be enjoyed by all members of the family, although in many cultures women bear primary responsibility. Cooking is also often carried out outside of personal quarters, for example at restaurants, or schools. Bakeries were among the earliest forms of cooking outside the home, and in the past, often offered cooking for pots of food that customers provided as an additional service. In the present day, factory food preparation has become common, with many "ready-to-eat" as well as "ready-to-cook" foods being prepared and cooked in factories, and home cooks using a mixture of scratch made, and factory-made foods together to make a meal. The nutritional value of including more commercially prepared foods is inferior to that of home-made foods. Home-cooked meals tend to be healthier with fewer calories, and less saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium on a per calorie basis while providing more fiber, calcium, and iron. The ingredients are also directly sourced, so there is control over authenticity, taste, and nutritional value. The superior nutritional quality of home-cooking could therefore play a role in preventing chronic disease. Cohort studies following the elderly over 10 years show that adults who cook their own meals have significantly lower mortality, even when controlling for confounding variables.
"Home-cooking" may be associated with comfort food, and some commercially produced foods and restaurant meals are presented through advertising or packaging as having been "home-cooked", regardless of their actual origin. This trend began in the 1920s and is attributed to people in urban areas of the U.S. wanting homestyle food, even though their schedules and smaller kitchens made cooking harder.

Cope and stick construction is a frame and panel joinery technique often used in the making of doors, wainscoting, and other decorative features for cabinets, furniture, and homes.
In cope and stick construction, the "stick" is the molded edge with a cut along the inside of the frame where it is to be joined to the panel. The panel piece that meets the molding at a right angle must be "coped," or given a cope cut, across the end grain of the wood to match the molding's profile.

Copper extraction is the multi-stage process of obtaining copper from its ores. The conversion of copper ores consists of a series of physical, chemical, and electrochemical processes. Methods have evolved and vary with country depending on the ore source, local environmental regulations, and other factors. The copper smelters with the highest production capacity (metric tons of copper yearly) lie in China, Chile, India, Germany, Japan, Peru and Russia. China alone has over half of the world's production capacity and is also the world's largest consumer of refined copper.
Precious metals and sulfuric acid are often valuable by-products of copper refining. On the contrary, sulfuric acid is also needed consumable for the extraction of copper from oxides in leaching piles. Arsenic is the main type of impurity found in copper concentrates to enter smelting facilities. There has been an increase in arsenic in copper concentrates over the years since shallow, low-arsenic copper deposits have been progressively depleted.
History
Prehistory
The Old Copper Complex in North America has been radiometrically dated to around 6500 BCE, at least—making it one of the oldest known examples of copper extraction in the world. The earliest evidence of the cold-hammering of native copper comes from the excavation at Çayönü Tepesi in eastern Anatolia, which dates between 7200 and 6600 BCE. Among the various items considered to be votive or amulets, there was one that looked like a fishhook and one like an awl. Another find, at Shanidar Cave in Mergasur, Iraq, contained copper beads, and dates back to 8,700 BCE.
One of the world's oldest known copper mines, as opposed to usage of surface deposits, is at Timna Valley, Israel, and has been used since the fourth millennium BC, with surface deposit usage occurring in the fifth and sixth millennium.
The Pločnik archaeological site in southeastern Europe (Serbia) contains the oldest securely dated evidence of copper making at high temperature, from 5,000 BCE. The find in June 2010 extends for an additional 500 years, dated to 5th millennium BCE, representing the earlier record of copper smelting from Rudna Glava (Serbia).
The earliest copper work in the Atacama Desert and the Andean world as a whole dates to 1432–1132 BC. Ice core studies in Bolivia suggest copper smelting may have begun as early as 700 BC, over 2700 years ago. Various sites of Pre-Hispanic mines and metallurgical workshops have been identified in the Atacama Desert including those with remnants of chisels, casting waste and workshop debris. Tin bronze, arsenical bronze, and arsenical copper were valuable goods produced in the Inca Empire. About 74 km northeast of the Chilean city of Copiapó in Viña del Cerro the Incas had one of their largest mining and metallurgy centres at Qullasuyu. There is evidence of gold, silver and copper metallurgy at the site, including the production of bronze. When conquistador Diego de Almagro traversed the Atacama Desert in 1536 his men readily obtained copper horseshoes for their horses.
Copper smelting technology gave rise to the Copper Age, aka the Chalcolithic Age, and then the Bronze Age. The Bronze Age would not have been possible without the development of smelting technology.
19th century
The introduction of reverberatory furnaces to Chile around 1830 by Charles Saint Lambert revolutionized Chilean copper mining. In addition to this there was improvements of transport caused by the development of railroads and steam navigation. Prospector José Tomás Urmeneta discovered rich orebodies at Tamaya in 1850, a site that became one of Chile's main copper mines. All of this made Chile supply 18% of the copper produced worldwide in the 19th century and the country was from the 1850s to the 1870s the world's top producer. In some years Chile's copper production made up about 60% of the worlds output and its export tariff made up more than half the state's income.
Lambert's success in modernising the Chilean copper industry during the second quarter of the nineteenth century is thought to have sowed the seeds for the later demise of his own copper smelting business (among others) in Swansea.
By the late 19th century the Chilean mining industry once again lagged behind technological developments (e.g. flotation, leaching, large-scale open-pit mining) contributing to the drop of its share of the world production to 5–6% in the 1890s and similar shares remained in the 1900s and 1910s reaching a low of 4.3% in 1914. Up to the 1940s and 1950s there was also a notable lack of major copper exploration efforts by large mining companies that relied on purchasing prospects already known from the activity of small-scale miners and pirquineros.
Smelting
Until the latter half of the 20th century, smelting sulfide ores was almost the sole means of producing copper metal from mined ores (primary copper production). As of 2002, 80% of global primary copper production was from copper–iron–sulfur minerals, and the vast majority of these were treated by smelting.
Copper was initially recovered from sulfide ores by directly smelting the ore in a furnace. The smelters were initially located near the mines to minimize the cost of transport. This avoided the prohibitive costs of transporting the waste minerals and the sulfur and iron present in the copper-containing minerals. However, as the concentration of copper in the ore bodies decreased, the energy costs of smelting the whole ore also became prohibitive, and it became necessary to concentrate the ores first.
Initial concentration techniques included hand-sorting and gravity concentration. These resulted in high losses of copper. Consequently, the development of the froth flotation process was a major step forward in mineral processing. The modern froth flotation process was independently invented in the early 1900s in Australia by C.V Potter and around the same time by G. D. Delprat. It made the development of the giant Bingham Canyon mine in Utah possible.
In the twentieth century, most ores were concentrated before smelting. Smelting was initially undertaken using sinter plants and blast furnaces, or with roasters and reverberatory furnaces. Roasting and reverberatory furnace smelting dominated primary copper production until the 1960s.
Late 20th century trends
In the 1960s and 1970s large copper mining operations by U.S. companies were nationalized in many of the main copper producing countries. Thus by the 1980s state owned enterprises overtook the dominant role U.S. companies like Anaconda Copper and Kennecott had had until then. In the late 1970s and early 1980s various oil companies like ARCO, Exxon (Exxon Minerals) and Standard Oil Company expanded into copper mining for a few years before selling their copper assets. Reportedly gains were not as high as anticipated. Investments in copper mining concentrated in Chile in the 1980s and 1990s given that copper mining in other countries faced problems like political instability (Peru), increased environmental requirements (developed countries) or overall disinterest in foreign investment in a nationalized mining industry (Zaire, Zambia).
21st century
In the 2013-2023 period the copper smelting capacity in China and Zambia have increased while the capacity in Chile and the United States have decreased. China has by far the largest capacity for copper smelting with over half of the world's total. Besides the previously mentioned countries other countries where there is a significant installed cathode production capacity of the world's total as of 2023 are Japan (8%), Russia (5%), Poland (3-4%) and Bulgaria (3-4%).
Since the 1990s no new copper smelter have been built in Chile. Following the 2022 closure of Fundición Ventanas in central Chile there have been a public discussion on building a new large copper smelter in Chile. Antofagasta Region or Atacama Region has been proposed by Chilean industry scholars as viable replacements. Others have argued for keeping smelting in Valparaíso Region given the existence of nearby mines. While some argue the replacement plant should be near the coast, inland Chuquicamata and El Salvador have also been proposed as alternatives. The president of the National Mining Society (Sonami), Diego Hernández, estimates the construction period for a new smelter plant to be 5 to 7 years. A 2024 study identified Antofagasta Region as the best place for a new copper smelter given logistical advantages and an existing and expandable supply of copper concentrate from nearby mines.
The Guixi Smelter in inland southeastern China is the world's largest copper smelter by capacity. In 2015 it had an annual production capacity of 900,000 tons of copper.
Concentration (beneficiation)
The average grade of copper ores in the 21st century is below 0.6% copper, with a proportion of economic ore minerals being less than 2% of the total volume of the ore rock. Thus, all mining operations, the ore must usually be beneficiated (concentrated). The concentrate is typically sold to distant smelters, although some large mines have smelters located nearby. Such colocation of mines and smelters was more typical in the 19th and early 20th centuries, when smaller smelters could be economic. The subsequent processing techniques depend on the nature of the ore.
In the usual case when it is primarily sulfide copper minerals (such as chalcopyrite, FeCuS2), the ore is treated by comminution, where the rock is crushed to produce small particles (<100 μm) consisting of individual mineral phases. These particles are then ready to be separated to remove gangue (silicate rocks residues) using froth flotation.
Froth flotation
In froth flotation, the crushed ore is wetted, suspended in a slurry, and mixed with reagents that render the sulfide particles hydrophobic. Typical reagents ("collectors") include potassium ethylxanthate and sodium ethylxanthate, but dithiophosphates and dithiocarbamates are also used. The slurry is introduced to a water-filled aeration tank containing a surfactant such as methylisobutyl carbinol (MIBC). Air is constantly forced through the slurry. The air bubbles attach to the hydrophobic copper sulfide particles, which are conveyed to the surface where the froth is skimmed off. These skimmings are generally subjected to a cleaner-scavenger cell to remove excess silicates and to remove other sulfide minerals that can deleteriously impact the concentrate quality (typically, galena), and the final concentrate is sent for smelting. The rock that has not floated off in the flotation cell is either discarded as tailings or further processed to extract other metals such as lead (from galena) and zinc (from sphalerite), should they exist. A variety of measures are taken to improve the efficiency of the froth flotation. Lime is used to raise the pH of the water bath, causing the collector to bond more efficiently to the copper sulfides. The process can produce concentrates with 27–29% and 37–40% copper contents from chalcopyrite and chalcocite, respectively.
Hydrometallurgy
Oxidised copper ores include carbonates such as azurite and malachite, the silicate chrysocolla, and sulfates such as chalcanthite. In some cases, sulfide ores are allowed to degrade to oxides. Such ores are amenable to hydrometallurgy. Specifically, such oxide ores are usually extracted into aqueous sulfuric acid, usually in a heap leaching or dump leaching. The resulting pregnant leach solution is purified by solvent extraction (SX). It is treated with an organic solvent and an organic chelators. The chelators bind the copper ions (and no other ions, ideally), the resulting complexes dissolve in the organic phase. This organic solvent is evaporated, leaving a residue of the copper complexes. The copper ions are liberated from the residue with sulfuric acid. The barred (denuded) sulfuric acid recycled back on to the heaps. The organic ligands are recovered and recycled as well. Alternatively, the copper can be precipitated out of the pregnant solution by contacting it with scrap iron; a process called cementation. Cement copper is normally less pure than SX-EW copper.
Specialized ores
Secondary sulfides—those formed by supergene secondary enrichment—are resistant (refractory) to sulfuric leaching. Secondary copper sulfides are dominated by the mineral chalcocite; a mineral formed from primary sulfides, like chalcopyrite, that undergo chemical processes such as oxidation or reduction. Typically, secondary sulfide ores are concentrated using froth flotation. Other extraction processes like leaching are effectively used for the extraction of secondary copper sulfides, but as demand for copper rises, extraction processes tailored for low-grade ores are required, due to the depletion of copper resources. Processes including in situ, dump, and heap leaching are cost-effective methods that are suitable for extracting copper from low-grade ores.
Extraction processes for secondary copper sulfides and low-grade ores includes the process of heap bioleaching. Heap bioleaching presents a cost efficient extraction method that requires a less intensive energy input resulting in a higher profit. This extraction process can be applied to large quantities of low-grade ores, at a lower capital cost with minimal environmental impact.
Generally, direct froth flotation is not used to concentrate copper oxide ores, as a result of the largely ionic and hydrophilic structure of the copper oxide mineral surface. Copper oxide ores are typically treated via chelating-reagent flotation and fatty-acid flotation, which use organic reagents to ensure adsorption onto the mineral surface through the formation of hydrophobic compounds on the mineral surface.
Some supergene sulfide deposits can be leached using a bacterial oxidation heap leach process to oxidize the sulfides to sulfuric acid, which also allows for simultaneous leaching with sulfuric acid to produce a copper sulfate solution. For oxide ores, solvent extraction and electrowinning technologies are used to recover the copper from the pregnant leach solution. To ensure the best recovery of copper, it is important to acknowledge the effect copper dissolution, acid consumption, and gangue mineral composition has on the efficacy of extraction.
Supergene sulfide ores rich in native copper are refractory to treatment with sulfuric acid leaching on all practicable time scales, and the dense metal particles do not react with froth flotation media. Typically, if native copper is a minor part of a supergene profile it will not be recovered and will report to the tailings. When rich enough, native copper ore bodies may be treated to recover the contained copper by gravity separation. Often, the nature of the gangue is important, as clay-rich native copper ores prove difficult to liberate. This is because clay minerals interact with flotation reagents used in extraction processes, that are then consumed, which results in minimal recovery of a high grade copper concentrate.
Roasting
The roasting process is generally undertaken in combination with reverberatory furnaces. In the roaster, the copper concentrate is partially oxidised to produce "calcine". Sulfur dioxide is liberated. The stoichiometry of the reaction is:
CuFeS2 + 3 O2 → 2 FeO + 2 CuS + 2 SO2
Roasting generally leaves more sulfur in the calcined product (15% in the case of the roaster at Mount Isa Mines) than a sinter plant leaves in the sintered product (about 7% in the case of the Electrolytic Refining and Smelting smelter).
As of 2005, roasting is no longer common in copper concentrate treatment because its combination with reverberatory furnaces is not energy efficient and the SO2 concentration in the roaster offgas is too dilute for cost-effective capture. Direct smelting is now favored, and uses the following smelting technologies: flash smelting, Isasmelt, Noranda, Mitsubishi or El Teniente furnaces.
Smelting
The initial melting of the material to be smelted is usually referred to as the smelting or matte smelting stage. It can be undertaken in a variety of furnaces, including the largely obsolete blast furnaces and reverberatory furnaces, as well as flash furnaces, Isasmelt furnaces, etc. The product of this smelting stage is a mixture of copper, iron and sulfur that is enriched in copper, which is called matte or copper matte. The term matte grade is normally used to refer to the copper content of the matte.
The purpose of the matte smelting stage is to eliminate as much of the unwanted iron, sulfur and gangue minerals (such as silica, magnesia, alumina and limestone) as possible, while minimizing the loss of copper. This is achieved by reacting iron sulfides with oxygen (in air or oxygen enriched air) to produce iron oxides (mainly as FeO, but with some magnetite (Fe3O4)) and sulfur dioxide.
Copper sulfide and iron oxide can mix, but when sufficient silica is added, a separate slag layer is formed. Adding silica also reduces the melting point (or, more properly, the liquidus temperature) of the slag, meaning that the smelting process can be operated at a lower temperature.
The slag forming reaction is:
FeO + SiO2 → FeO.SiO2
Slag is less dense than matte, so it forms a layer that floats on top of the matte.
Copper can be lost from the matte in three ways: as cuprous oxide (Cu2O) dissolved in the slag, as sulfide copper dissolved in the slag or as tiny droplets (or prills) of matte suspended in the slag.
The amount of copper lost as oxide copper increases as the oxygen potential of the slag increases. The oxygen potential generally increases as the copper content of the matte is increased. Thus, the loss of copper as oxide increases as the copper content of the matte increases.
On the other hand, the solubility of sulfidic copper in slag decreases as the copper content of the matte increases beyond about 40%. Nagamori calculated that more than half the copper dissolved in slags from mattes containing less than 50% copper is sulfidic copper. Above this figure, oxidic copper begins to dominate.
The loss of copper as prills suspended in the slag depends on the size of the prills, the viscosity of the slag and the settling time available. Rosenqvist suggested that about half the copper losses to slag were due to suspended prills.
The mass of slag generated in the smelting stage depends on the iron content of the material fed into the smelting furnace and the target matte grade. The greater the iron content of the feed, the more iron that will need to be rejected to the slag for a given matte grade. Similarly, increasing the target matte grade requires the rejection of more iron and an increase in the slag volume.
Thus, the two factors that most affect the loss of copper to slag in the smelting stage are:
matte grade
mass of slag.
This means that there is a practical limit on how high the matte grade can be if the loss of copper to slag is to be minimized. Therefore, further stages of processing (converting and fire refining) are required.
The following subsections briefly describe some of the processes used in matte smelting.
Reverberatory furnace smelting
Reverberatory furnaces are long furnaces that can treat wet, dry, or roasted concentrate. Most of the reverberatory furnaces used in the latter years treated roasted concentrate because putting dry feed materials into the reverberatory furnace is more energy efficient, and because the elimination of some of the sulfur in the roaster results in higher matte grades.
The reverberatory furnace feed is added to the furnace through feed holes along the sides of the furnace, and the solid charge is melted. Additional silica is normally added to help form the slag. The furnace is fired with burners using pulverized coal, fuel oil or natural gas.
Reverberatory furnaces can additionally be fed with molten slag from the later converting stage to recover the contained copper and other materials with a high copper content.
Because the reverberatory furnace bath is quiescent, very little oxidation of the feed occurs (and thus very little sulfur is eliminated from the concentrate). It is essentially a melting process. Consequently, wet-charged reverberatory furnaces have less copper in their matte product than calcine-charged furnaces, and they also have lower copper losses to slag. Gill quotes a copper in slag value of 0.23% for a wet-charged reverberatory furnace vs 0.37% for a calcine-charged furnace.
In the case of calcine-charged furnaces, a significant portion of the sulfur has been eliminated during the roasting stage, and the calcine consists of a mixture of copper and iron oxides and sulfides. The reverberatory furnace acts to allow these species to approach chemical equilibrium at the furnace operating temperature (approximately 1600 °C at the burner end of the furnace and about 1200 °C at the flue end; the matte is about 1100 °C and the slag is about 1195 °C). In this equilibration process, oxygen associated with copper compounds exchanges with sulfur associated with iron compounds, increasing the iron oxide content of the furnace, and the iron oxides interact with silica and other oxide materials to form the slag.
The main equilibration reaction is:
Cu2O + FeS → Cu2S + FeO
The slag and the matte form distinct layers that can be removed from the furnace as separate streams. The slag layer is periodically allowed to flow through a hole in the wall of the furnace above the height of the matte layer. The matte is removed by draining it through a hole into ladles for it to be carried by crane to the converters. This draining process is known as tapping the furnace. The matte taphole is normally a hole through a water-cooled copper block that prevents erosion of the refractory bricks lining the furnace. When the removal of the matte or slag is complete, the hole is normally plugged with clay, which is removed when the furnace is ready to be tapped again.
Reverberatory furnaces were often used to treat molten converter slag to recover contained copper. This would be poured into the furnaces from ladles carried by cranes. However, the converter slag is high in magnetite and some of this magnetite would precipitate from the converter slag (due to its higher melting point), forming an accretion on the hearth of the reverberatory furnace and necessitating shut downs of the furnace to remove the accretion. This accretion formation limits the quantity of converter slag that can be treated in a reverberatory furnace.
While reverberatory furnaces have very low copper losses to slag, they are not very energy-efficient and the low concentrations of sulfur dioxide in their off-gases make its capture uneconomic. Consequently, smelter operators devoted a lot of money in the 1970s and 1980s to developing new, more efficient copper smelting processes. In addition, flash smelting technologies had been developed in earlier years and began to replace reverberatory furnaces. By 2002, 20 of the 30 reverberatory furnaces still operating in 1994 had been shut down.
Flash furnace smelting
In flash smelting, the concentrate is dispersed in an air or oxygen stream and the smelting reactions are largely completed while the mineral particles are still in flight. The reacted particles then settle in a bath at the bottom of the furnace, where they behave like calcine in a reverberatory furnace. A slag layer forms on top of the matte layer, and they can separately be tapped from the furnace.
ISASMELT
Converting
The matte, which is produced in the smelter, contains 30–70% copper (depending on the process used and the operating philosophy of the smelter), primarily as copper sulfide, as well as iron sulfide. The sulfur is removed at a high temperature as sulfur dioxide by blowing air through molten matte:
2 CuS + 3 O2 → 2 CuO + 2 SO2
CuS + O2 → Cu + SO2
In a parallel reaction the iron sulfide is converted to slag:
2 FeS + 3 O2 → 2 FeO + 2 SO2
2 FeO + SiO2 → Fe2SiO4
The purity of this product is 98%, it is known as blister because of the broken surface created by the escape of sulfur dioxide gas as blister copper pigs or ingots are cooled. By-products generated in the process are sulfur dioxide and slag. The sulfur dioxide is captured and converted to sulfuric acid and either sold on the open market or used in copper leaching processes.
Refining
Fire refining
The blister copper is put into an anode furnace, a furnace that refines the blister copper to anode-grade copper in two stages by removing most of the remaining sulfur and iron, and then removing oxygen introduced during the first stage. This second stage, often referred to as poling is done by blowing natural gas, or some other reducing agent, through the molten copper oxide. When this flame burns green, indicating the copper oxidation spectrum, the oxygen has mostly been burned off. This creates pyrometallurgically refined copper at about 99% pure.
Electrolysis
The final stage in the production of copper is electrorefining. Refining is achieved by electrolysis, which exploits the easy (low potential) and selective conversion of copper(II) solutions to the metal. The anodes cast from processed blister copper are placed into an aqueous solution of 3–4% copper sulfate and 10–16% sulfuric acid. Cathodes are thin rolled sheets of highly pure copper or, more commonly these days, reusable stainless steel starting sheets (as in the IsaKidd process). A potential of only 0.2–0.4 volts is required for the process to commence. In industrial plants current densities up to 420 A/m2 are possible.
At the anode (oxidation reaction), copper and less noble metals dissolve. More noble metals and less soluble elements such as silver, gold, selenium, and tellurium settle to the bottom of the cell as anode slime, which forms a salable by-product. Copper(II) ions migrate through the electrolyte to the cathode. At the cathode (reduction reaction), Cu2+ ions are reduced in copper metal and Cu(s) plates out, but less noble constituents such as arsenic and zinc remain in solution unless a higher voltage is used.
The reactions involving metallic copper and Cu2+ ions at the electrodes are the following:
Concentrate and copper marketing
Copper concentrates produced by mines are sold to smelters and refiners who treat the ore and refine the copper and charge for this service via treatment charges (TCs) and refining charges (RCs). The TCs are charged in US$ per tonne of concentrate treated and RCs are charged in cents per pound treated, denominated in US dollars, with benchmark prices set annually by major Japanese smelters. The customer in this case can be a smelter, who on-sells blister copper ingots to a refiner, or a smelter-refiner which is vertically integrated.
One prevalent form of copper concentrate contains gold and silver, like the one produced by Bougainville Copper Limited from the Panguna mine from the early 1970s to the late 1980s.
The typical contract for a miner is denominated against the London Metal Exchange price, minus the TC-RCs and any applicable penalties or credits. Penalties may be assessed against copper concentrates according to the level of deleterious elements such as arsenic, bismuth, lead or tungsten. Because a large portion of copper sulfide ore bodies contain silver or gold in appreciable amounts, a credit can be paid to the miner for these metals if their concentration within the concentrate is above a certain amount. Usually the refiner or smelter charges the miner a fee based on the concentration; a typical contract will specify that a credit is due for every ounce of the metal in the concentrate above a certain concentration; below that, if it is recovered, the smelter will keep the metal and sell it to defray costs.
Copper concentrate is traded either via spot contracts or under long term contracts as an intermediate product in its own right. Often the smelter sells the copper metal itself on behalf of the miner. The miner is paid the price at the time that the smelter-refiner makes the sale, not at the price on the date of delivery of the concentrate. Under a Quotational Pricing system, the price is agreed to be at a fixed date in the future, typically 90 days from time of delivery to the smelter.
A-grade copper cathode is of 99.99% copper in sheets that are approximately 1 meter square; thickness and weight depend on manufacturer. Typical 1 cm thick sheet weighs approximately 200 pounds (about 90 kg). It is a true commodity, deliverable to and tradeable upon the metal exchanges in New York City (COMEX), London (London Metals Exchange) and Shanghai (Shanghai Futures Exchange). Often copper cathode is traded upon the exchanges indirectly via warrants, options, or swap contracts such that the majority of copper is traded upon the LME/COMEX/SFE, but delivery is achieved directly, logistically moving the physical copper, and transferring the copper sheet from the physical warehouses themselves.
The chemical specification for electrolytic grade copper is ASTM B 115-00 (a standard that specifies the purity and maximum electrical resistivity of the product).

The Corex Process is a smelting reduction process created by Primetals Technologies as a more environmentally friendly alternative to the blast furnace. Presently, the majority of steel production is through the blast furnace which has to rely on coking coal and requires a sinter plant in order to prepare the iron ore for reduction. Unlike the blast furnace, smelting reduction processes are typical smaller and use coal and oxygen directly to reduce iron ore into a usable product.
Smelting reduction processes come in two basic varieties, two-stage or single-stage. In a single-stage system the iron ore is both reduced and melted in the same container. In a two-stage process, like Corex, the ore is reduced in one shaft and melted and purified in another. Plants using the Corex process have been put use in areas such as South Africa, India, and China.
First COREX process was installed in 1988 at South Africa.
Process
The Corex process consists of two main parts: a Reduction Shaft and a Melter-Gasifier. The main reagents for the Corex process are iron ore, non-coking coal, and oxygen. Unlike a blast furnace, the Corex process does not use a hot blast of nitrogen, thereby greatly reducing NOx gas emissions, but instead uses oxygen. In addition, the Corex process can use iron oxides containing up to 80% lump ore and uses non-coking coal directly as a reducing agent.
In the reduction shaft the iron ore, along with limestone and dolomite additives, is added and then reduced by reduction gas into 95% direct reduced iron, DRI. The DRI is then redirected via six discharge screws into the melter-gasifier. The melter-gasifier has three main sections, the gaseous free board zone, the char bed, and the hearth zone, and it has an effect on several stages in the process. First it serves to create the reduction gas by gasifying the coal with oxygen and then cooling it. After being reduced, the DRI is redirected to the char bed where the iron and slag are melted and then directed to the hearth zone. The heat inside the metal gasifier keeps the amount of phenols small, keeping them out of the atmosphere. Meanwhile, carbon monoxide and hydrogen gas from the original gasification of the coal exit the gasifier while other byproducts are captured in the metallic slag. The rest of the hot gas is then cooled and sent into the reduction shaft resulting in the Corex export gas which is used to control pressure in the plant. Many of the gases resulting from this process can then be recycled or used to produce electricity. Dust particles also appear in these gases and the melter-gasifier recycles them with four dust burners.
Advantages
There are many advantages to the Corex Process, for example carbon dioxide emissions are up to 20% lower than with the conventional blast furnace, and the Corex process produces far less SO2 and dust than the blast furnace.
In addition Corex plants do not release as many phenols or sulfides limiting water contamination.
Disadvantages
There are drawbacks. For example, at the JSW Steel plant in India it was found that to be viable the Corex process still needed about 15% coke. Furthermore, it has also been found that Corex plants require large amounts of oxygen which can be expensive. Also the export gas can make the process highly inefficient. However, this particular problem can be mitigated by using the export gas in electricity production.

Coring happens when a heated alloy, such as a Cu-Ni system, cools in non-equilibrium conditions. The center of each grain, which is the first part to freeze, is rich in the high-melting element (e.g., nickel for this Cu–Ni system), whereas the concentration of the low-melting element increases with position from this region to the grain boundary. This is termed a 'cored structure', which gives rise to less than the optimal properties. The distribution of the two elements within the grains is nonuniform, a phenomenon termed 'segregation'; that is, concentration gradients are established across the grains.
As a casting having a cored structure is reheated, grain boundary regions will melt first in as much as they are richer in the low-melting component. This produces a sudden loss in mechanical integrity due to the thin liquid film that separates the grains. Furthermore, this melting may begin at a temperature below the equilibrium solidus temperature of the alloy. Coring may be eliminated by a homogenization heat treatment carried out at a temperature below the solidus point for the particular alloy composition. During this process, atomic diffusion occurs, which produces compositionally homogeneous grains.
Coring is predominantly observed in alloys having a marked difference between liquidus and solidus temperatures. It is often being removed by subsequent annealing and/or hot-working. It is exploited in zone refining techniques to produce high purity metals. Coring was first discovered by Aubrey Tang.

A corporate forest is a forest or woodland area owned by a corporate body rather than a state or individual.
For example, in Germany, a corporate forest (German: Körperschaftswald) is, in accordance with Section 3, Paragraph 2, of the Federal Forest Act (Bundeswaldgesetz), a wood owned by a public body such as a municipality or town (also called a communal, town or municipal forest or even an "interested parties forest"), a university (then called a university forest) or other specified body.
Forests owned by the Church are not automatically classified by the German federal government as corporate forests, but may be so classified by state law. The special features of corporate forests are regulated in the state forest laws. In Saxony-Anhalt, for example, it is stipulated that corporate forests serve the common good to a special degree, that the economic objectives must ensure the conservation and sustainable management of the forest as an overall resource, that the utility, protective and recreational functions form a unit and that corporate forests must be managed in accordance with ecological and economic requirements In Saxony, the regulations for corporate forests also apply to church forests.
Other types of forest may include state forests and private forests.

The Corps Hubertia Freiburg is a fraternity (Studentenverbindung) in Freiburg, Germany. It was founded on October 29, 1868, and is one of 162 German Student Corps in Europe today. The Corps is a member of the Kösener Senioren-Convents-Verband (KSCV), the oldest federation of classical European fraternities with roots dating back to the 15th century and member fraternities across Austria, Belgium, Germany, Hungary, Latvia and Switzerland.
Membership to the fraternity is open to honorable men studying at one of Freiburg's universities and based exclusively on personality, good moral standing, and strength of character. Members of the Corps Hubertia value and engage in the tradition of academic fencing duels as a way to sharpen and prove their character under pressure. Continuing a practice dating back into the 1700s, Hubertia's members wear the traditional Couleur, colored stripes, in green-gold-black. The fraternity teaches and expects tolerance from its members, stemming from diverse ethnic, national, religious and political backgrounds. Hubertia's members are often referred to as Huberten.
Members of the fraternity controlled the forestry departments of Baden, the south-west of Germany, in a de facto monopoly from the late 1800s to the early 20th century. Many of the members today practice this heritage as passionate hunters in private and fraternity events.
Fundamentals and principles
Like all Corps, Hubertia expects and practices tolerance in political, scientific and religious affairs. In historical and very general terms, German Student Corps students have traditionally been recruited from the social and nobleman elite, and appreciate the perception to be more elitist than other German student fraternities such as the Catholic Cartellverband and the right-wing or nationalist Burschenschaften. The Corps, rooted in German idealism, expect their members to rise above personal religious or political affiliations, considering tolerance and individuality to be key tenets of each individual inside and outside of the fraternity. Their general political perception is cosmopolitan and conservative in nature, yet clearly distanced from the right-wing or nationalist views of the formerly mentioned Burschenschaften.
Members of the Corps Hubertia value and practice the tradition of academic fencing duels, or "Mensur" in German, with members of other proper fraternities. Academic fencing, originating in the German school of fencing, is understood as a way to exercise good judgement and prove character, allowing the corps member to show his determination by standing one's ground under pressure, while enhancing the bonds between the corps brothers at the same time.
Hubertia's members identify themselves wearing the traditional Couleur, colored stripes, as well as caps and/or other specific garments at official occasions. This tradition known as "wearing colors" (German: Farben tragen) provides means to recognize members of other fraternities and, likewise, identification for the corps brothers with each other and their traditions.
Members are encouraged to have their own world view and be able to argue it; but Hubertia as such always remains neutral. The fraternity encourages freshly admitted (pledging "fox") members with diverse ethnic, national, religious and political backgrounds to prove themselves as valuable corps brothers, purely on the basis of personal character and merit, before becoming eligible to be fully incorporated (Rezeption).
The fraternity has approximately 255 members of all ages (including alumni) coming from or residing in Austria, the Czech Republic, Switzerland, France, Germany, South Africa, Taiwan, Turkey, and the United States. Every full member is member for life.
Hubertia's members value nature, and the manifold ways to experience her. Enjoyed in good company and providing a benevolent Diana, hunting is tradition and it provides means to spend time among Corps Brothers of high standard.
The object and purpose of the Corps was and still is solely the education of students to become a strong, free and cosmopolitan personality who is not held back by religious, racist, national, scientific or philosophical limitations of the mind. Three primary institutions within the fraternity aid with achieving this aim; including the Corpsconvent [regular council meetings of the Corps Brothers], the Kneipe [celebratory get-together of Corps Brothers with speeches, beer and songs], and today's Bestimmungsmensur [the event of academic fencing with sharp blades for the first or one of the first times], where the ones to fence are chosen on the basis of placing two equal opponents in front of each other. [...] This experience, and the intertwined need to overcome one's own fear, dedicated to the union of his Corps, and the connected strengthening of the sense of community aids the personal growth just as does taking a hit without losing one's stand and accepting the assessment of the Mensur by the own Corps Brothers.
History
Origins in Karlsruhe
Hubertia was founded on Oktober 29, 1868 als association among students of forestry at the university Polytechnikum der Forstschule Karlsruhe. The colors green-gold-black were chosen to represent the fraternity's principles, and initially were not yet worn openly. The slogan Concordia parvae res crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur (understood as "strength through unity") was defined in 1870, influencing the fraternities members' connections up to this day. Then, on Oktober 18, 1874, the fraternity was opened up to students outside of forestry and Couleur became part of every Corps brother's daily routine on Juni 7, 1875. Shortly after that, a local fencing club was established at the fraternity's location in 1876.
The so-called compulsory satisfaction, meaning everyone's duty to keep or regain one's honor in a fencing duel with sharp blades if challenged, became part of the fraternity's charter in 1886 and every member's tradition. This step further intensified the number and quality of academic fencing duels of Hubertia's fraternity members.
When the department of forestry moved from Karlsruhe to Freiburg im Breisgau, Hubertia settled in Freiburg and became Corps on November 27, 1920. After a short acquaintance period with the other SC-Corps in Freiburg, the Corps Hubertia became a full member of the Freiburg's league of corps (SC) on February 2, 1921.
Hubertia in Freiburg
Hubertia had 14 student members in Summer of 1920, a large number at that time, especially considering that they were all forestry students as all other members had to remain in Karlsruhe for the time being, as their departments had not moved and switching universities was a complicated procedure. The first weeks in Freiburg were filled with establishing regular meetings to celebrate or fence. Official fencing relationships, so-called Paukverhältnisse, were established with the other local Corps in Freiburg's league of corps (SC) and the fraternity Turnerschaft Markomanno-Albertia. Establishing this fencing relationship allowing regular fencing practice and duels to take place was back then the common procedure for a Corps to become a member of the local League of Corps at a university location, a tradition that has not changed to this day. This step was supported by the de:Corps Rhenania Freiburgge and Corps Suevia Freiburg who were hoping to increase the number of students from Baden (lower Germany) to counteract the rising number of students from the north of Germany in Freiburg's fraternity landscape.
The fraternity's alumni convention, Alte Herren Vereinigung in German, granted the student members' convention (Corpsburschen-Conventge), to file an application to enter Freiburg's League of Corps (SCge). Following a short period of joint gatherings and duels in academic fencing with Freiburg's other Corps as well as an inspection of Hubertia's statutes, Corps Rhenania officially requested for Corps Hubertia to become an official member of the local SC on February 2, 1921. Culminating in a grand ceremony, Hubertia thus had, 53 years after her inception, become a full member Corps of the Kösener Senioren-Convents-Verband (KSCV).
Struggle in Baden
Members of dueling fraternities (fraternities practicing academic fencing) were highly respected during the time of the German Empire, 1871 to 1918, both in general terms as well as holding public offices. This started to change slowly during times for the Weimar Republic, 1918 to 1933, even in local forestry departments. The finance minister of Baden, Heinrich Köhler, a politician belonging to the Deutschen Zentrumspartei (German Central Party), demanded openly in the state senate that "Hubertia's members are to be extinct in Baden's state forestry duties and minteries".
We need to change the current forestry establishment using an iron fist. The central government seems factually and personally ossified, driven by state arrogance and with alumni members of the fraternity "Hubertia" calling the shots, untouchable now as then, and monopolizing the general direction the state is taking. Everywhere from local to state levels having the alumni of this fraternity ensured their ability to prevent outsiders from marginalizing them.
In 1920, 118 of the 227 of Hubertia's living members were men in forestry (~1/2). Of these 118, 83 held a state or private forestry office in the area of what is Baden-Württemberg today, formed by combining the former states Baden and Württemberg during the post-war area in 1952. Hence, as there were roughly 240 forestry offices in the area of Baden-Württemberg in 1920, Hubertia had members managing about 1/3 of all the forestry offices in today's state borders. Köhler wanted to minimize this high number of Hubertens. His first step was to establish a so-called Numerus clausus for forestry in Freiburg and determined personally about a prospective student's admission in person. During the following ten years, Köhler's selection had its effect on Hubertia's influence: While the fraternity provided 37 prospective forestry officers in 1920, the number fell to only six in 1938.
I very much intentionally decided to promote, and selected, catholic members for over six years.
As this so-called culture fight was originally one between Catholics and more Protestant, Bismark-oriented and Prussia-friendly group of people, Hubertia was caught in the middle. Becker was a politician of the catholic Centrum party and openly voiced that Catholics only made it into higher offices in the area of Baden-Württemberg when they had been members of Hubertia. This can be understood as a typical statement during the cultural war (Kulturkampf) with Köhler voicing his antipathy towards the fraternity of Hubertia. On the other hand, Hasel completely disproves Köhller's view: He points out that the view of Catholics only having gotten into higher office positions if they had been Hubertia's members must be false as access to Baden's office career track was not bound by confession. Catholic forestry office applicants were not hindered on their path, which is proven by several of personnel files.
When the governing forestry manager Duke von Wiser of Meßkirch was set to become the head of the state forestry office in Karlsruhe, the then-governing manager reported on him (signed Krutina) that "he is a Catholic, but has an evangelical wife, who is daughter to a diseased forestry council head of Davans. Though he is a hunter, he does not pursue it with passion, as he lacks passion in general. So far he has done his uneasy duties well in Meßkirch and qualifies.
This report and the catholic men mentioned for offices in forestry provide evidence that religions orientation of applicants did not influence hiring decisions in Baden's forestry department. Furthermore, there was not one of Hubertia's members within the ranks of the forestry officers mentioned in Hasel's notes. Due to that, there was no verifiable connection between an applicant's religious orientation and his connection to the fraternity of Hubertia, when he ran for a public forestry office.
The report on Duke Wiser, mentioned above, on the other hand confirms Hasels point of view: Duke von Wiser, who had been given administrative powers over the forestry department in Friedrichstal, had been a member of Hubertia since 1877. Krutina on the other hand, who originated the quoted report, was just as well a member of Hubertia. If one would assume that Kurtina sides with Wiser due to their connection within their common fraternity, then we should be able to deduct supportive words instead of criticism. What surprises though is that the report itself speaks in a critical, if not negative, tone where Krutina denies Wiser any passion for his work: He refers to him as a mediocre hunter, something that is unlikely to be said between friends portraying each other outside. If there would have been unfair connections between members of Hubertia, then Krutina's report would likely have resulted in a more positive view of Wiser and the situation.
When the position of the state's forestry minister and office head of Baden's forestry department was to be reappointed, Köhler intentionally decided against a member of Hubertia and put Karl Philipp in the position. Karl Phillip represented the so-called young forestry school and was knows to be very critical of the old establishment in Baden's forestry departments. He made many enemies with his destructive critique and his dogmatic lopsidedness, especially with his predecessors.
With Philipp's assumption of office, two fractions developed within Baden's forestry departments. The young forest school, being under Philipp's management, was supported by younger forestry officers; while none of the older ones openly sided with Philipp. With a majority of Hubertia's members belonging to the conservative and older members within Baden's forestry departments, this had to hurt long-term, as indicated in several publications and memoirs criticizing Philipps actions or workings.
From 1919 to 1936, 41 forestry officers were members of Hubertia, five of which were governors of the state forestry department and three had been the forestry president.
1933 to 1945
Free and open-minded student organizations were a thorn in the National Socialist party's view of the world. Before coming to power, the national socialists had instituted the National Socialist German Students' League (NSDSB) that strove to be the one and only students' association. Once in power in 1933, Hitler's party started to ban independent fraternities and sororities in Germany. Similar to other Corps, Hubertia's reaction was first to go underground and exist as a so-called "association among Freiburg's fencing circle" instead of being referred to as a Corps. As pressure increased, Hubertia's members chose the official self-liquidation (Selbst-Suspension) on May 18, 1936, to avoid discovery or annexation to the NSDSB.
To still provide means for Hubertia's Corps student and Alumni members to meet, the SC-Comradeship Hermann Löns was formed together with representatives from other Corps in Freiburg. This comradeship allowed fraternity members to remain undiscovered during congregations and to continue their practice of academic fencing, which had become strictly forbidden and could, when discovered, lead to capital punishment in Nazi Germany at that point in time. The meeting place remained Hubertia's fraternity house. While partially interrupted due to heightened pressure of Nazi espionage, fencing Mensur duels continued and even intensified from 1941 on, with over 100 of such duels happening during World War II.
Post-war period and Hubertia today
Following the war, Hubertia's alumni association was reactivated on May 20, 1946. Both, the members of the formerly established SC-Comradeship and the Association of Bremer Students (est. on Oct. 29, 1947 by members of Hubertia who had started alternative comradeships during the war) were formerly accepted into the fraternity on January 17, 1948. The students from Bremen officially moved to Freiburg that year and re-established the Studentenverbindung Hubertia not yet as Corps as these were still forbidden under Allied control. The official Allied guideline was to make sure that "nothing Nazi" would be re-established post-war and student organizations were handled with care in general. Hubertia took the following two years to establish that it was her confrontation with Nazi-Germany that led to the former dissolution by choice and underground existence. In parallel, some of Hubertia's members moved from Bremen to Marburg as Freiburg university did not yet provide certain departments that early after the war. These members helped to re-establish, or reconstitute, the de:Corps Holsatia Kielde, de:Corps Hansea Bonnde and de:Corps Suevia Straßburgde in Marburg.
On November 14, 1950, Hubertia officially took the title Corps Hubertia back on. The League of Corps SC-Freiburg reconstituted in the following year with Hubertia, Rhenania and Suevia. Next, Hubertia helped to reconstitute the KSCV at the Godesburg the same year, 1951. The next years were ones of ensuring balance and normality for fraternities in Germany again. Hubertia became the leading Corps in 1966 with Hans-Joachim Hiebsch as the president of the oKC, the official Kösen Congregation.
Today, Hubertia is the oldest fraternity in Baden-Württemberg and the second-oldest one in Germany that continues to practice a tradition of forestry and fencing. As, currently, the oldest fraternity sharing Corps Hubertia Freiburg's traditions, Corps Hubertia München is giving up on the tradition of forestry and hunting, Hubertia is set to become the oldest fraternity in Europe keeping these values alive.
When Baden-Württemberg's Minister of Justice and Vice-Ministerpresedent and Corps Hubertia's alumni Ulrich Goll [de] was interviewed by local and national media about his relationship to guns, media focused on his fraternity background too and the value that hunting has in our society.
\
Symbols
Hubertia defined its fraternity colors green-gold-black on February 7, 1897. These colors are worn in the form a ribbon with a golden percussion (rim) diagonally across the chest, as it is typical for European fraternities. The common fraternity cap is the green Tellermütze or the more traditional Stürmer in dark-green. The freshly admitted (pledging "fox") members wear the two-colored ribbon in green-and-gold. To official fraternity events, some members might additionally wear a traditional green jacket, an adapted version of the contemporary chief forester's jacket typical for the Elsass, a former German region bordering France. This jacket is then combined with a Hirschfänger, a specific style of hunting dagger, on the side.
The slogan Concordia parvae res crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur ("concord will make small things flourish, discord will destroy even the greatest") was adapted on August 23, 1870. It still defines the fraternity members' association with each other and the way things are managed inside, as well as outside the fraternity, today.
House in Freiburg and the Lodge in the Black Forest
The original house in Freiburg "Zum Felsenkeller" was bought on Schlossbergstraße 7 in 1921 and served the fraternity through the troubled times before, during and shortly after WW II. The house was then torn down in 1968 and replaced with a new house at Fürstenbergstraße 23 in the south of Freiburg.
Many fraternity members pay regular visits to the lodge higher up in the Black Forest mountains near Freiburg. Traditionally, the last hour of the hike is done around sun-down to soak up what nature has to offer from dusk 'till dawn. The lodge provides means for relaxation, recreation and meditation without iPhones and computers.
Notable members
In alphabetic order. Links to the German Wikipedia are in process of being translated and currently indicated with "ge".Part of the more comprehensive list of German Student Corps members.
Otto Nüsslin (1850–1915), Zoologist at the TH Karlsruhe university; for further information see Otto Nüsslin ge.
Hans Albrecht ge (1923–2006), Vice president of Baden-Württemberg's state parliament
Otto Ammann ge (1879–1933), Rector (president) of the TH Karlsruhe university
Dieter Ammer ge (born 1950), Managing board member at Tchibo Holding AG
Ulrich Ammer ge (born 1934), Forestry scientist, editor of the Forstwissenschaftlichen Zentralblatt
Armin Berninghaus ge (born 1938), Managing board member at Westfalen AG
Fritz Eichhorn ge (1870–1939), Principal forest officer
Ulrich Goll ge (born 1950), Vice Prime Minister and justice minister for Baden-Württemberg
Hans Hausrath ge (1866–1945), Forestry scientist
Otto Henninger ge (1885–1966), Engineer
Günter Joetze ge (born 1933), ambassador for Germany
Johann Krieger ge (born 1949), Mayor of Ehingen (Donau area in Germany)
Erich Ullmann ge (1892–1965), Council of States for Thurgau in Bern (Switzerland), Lieutenant-Colonel at the Swiss general staff headquarters during WW II
Wolfgang Wechsler ge (1930–2012), Neuropathologist, professor in ordinary in Düsseldorf
Jürgen Winkler ge (born 1958), Neurologist and Neurobiologist
Erich Würfel ge (born 1926), District chief executive in Rastatt
Recipients of the Klinggräff-Medal (Klinggräff-Medaille)
The Klinggräff-Medal is awarded for the combination of extraordinary accomplishments in academia, involvement for the fraternity and proven leadership on local and, preferentially, national level. An average of five medals is awarded each year nation-wide, chosen by a joint alumni committee of KSCV and WSC representatives. The award indirectly reflects back at the fraternity, showing leaders in their field among the fraternity's brothers. For more information see Klinggräff-Medaille ge at the Association of German Student Corps Alumni ge.
Recipient of the Klinggräff-Medal for Corps Hubertia is:
Manfred Franke (2009)
Unique features of Corps Hubertia: fencing, firearms and friendship
Hubertia's members are - quite literally - Brothers in Arms. Be it the proper handling of a fencing blade under the psychological and physical strains of the Mensur or the correct management of a hunting rifle out in the field; be it hunting as a team or deerstalking in a dusky Sunday evening, followed by hours spent together near the campfire: Hubertia provides some of life's experiences in its purest form.
A Corps Alumni's (Alter Herr) ge hunting school offers courses to obtain the hunting license, with classes taking place at the fraternity house. This license, colloquially referred to as the "Green Diploma" does take about half a year of work and covers information from flora and fauna to legal and safety issues as well as the proper way to handle and successfully apply firearms, in essence delivering a "forestry light" course. Most of the participants are students at the local universities, studying subjects from Algebra over Medicine, and Law to Engineering.
Hunting in general and the experience with other Corps brothers specifically has a very high standing within the fraternity. Many of the alumni provide the hunting location and hospitality to members as well as invited guests, often organizing joint events with the younger members from Freiburg. The tradition strengthens bonds across different age groups and usually forms and deepens lifelong friendships.
Corps form relationships with each other that are the basis for regular visits and various forms of support between the fraternities. One of Hubertia's relationships, yet, is an exceptional one: The bond formed with the Corps Friso-Cheruskia (WSC) in Karlsruhe established a bridge between the two main Corps associations, the KSCV and the WSC. This bridging bond is unique for all Corps in Europe. Hubertia continued to form relationships with like-minded Corps, as elaborated in the following section.
Relationships with other Corps
In chronological order. Links to the German Wikipedia are in process of being translated and currently indicated with "ge".
Corps Friso-Cheruskia Karlsruhe im WSCge., "Traditionsverhältnis" since 1920
Corps Schacht Leobenge., "befreundetes Verhältnis" (2002)
Corps Guestphalia et Suevoborussia Marburgge., "befreundetes Verhältnis" (2010/1978)
Corps Hubertia Münchenge., "Vorstellungsverhältnis" (1975)
Corps Franconia Würzburgge., "Vorstellungsverhältnis" (2008)
Gallery
Impressions of Corps Hubertia's traditions outliving the times from the 19th to the 21st century.

Corrosion is a natural process that converts a refined metal into a more chemically stable oxide. It is the gradual deterioration of materials (usually a metal) by chemical or electrochemical reaction with their environment. Corrosion engineering is the field dedicated to controlling and preventing corrosion.
In the most common use of the word, this means electrochemical oxidation of a metal reacting with an oxidant such as oxygen (O2, gaseous or dissolved), or H3O+ ions ( H+, hydrated protons) present in aqueous solution. Rusting, the formation of red-orange iron oxides, is perhaps the most familiar example of electrochemical corrosion. This type of corrosion typically produces oxides or salts of the original metal and results in a distinctive coloration. Corrosion can also occur in materials other than metals, such as ceramics or polymers, although, in this context, the term degradation is more common. Corrosion degrades the useful properties of materials and structures including mechanical strength, appearance, and permeability to liquids and gases.
Many structural alloys corrode merely from exposure to moisture in air, but the process can be strongly affected by exposure to certain substances. Corrosion can be concentrated locally to form a pit or crack, or it can extend across a wide area, more or less uniformly corroding the surface. Because corrosion is a diffusion-controlled process, it occurs on exposed surfaces. As a result, methods to reduce the activity of the exposed surface, such as passivation and chromate conversion, can increase a material's corrosion resistance. However, some corrosion mechanisms are less visible and less predictable.
The chemistry of corrosion is complex; it can be considered an electrochemical phenomenon. During corrosion at a particular spot on the surface of an object made of iron, oxidation takes place and that spot behaves as an anode. The electrons released at this anodic spot move through the metal to another spot on the object and reduce oxygen at that spot in the presence of hydrogen ions (H+, which are believed to be available from carbonic acid (H2CO3) formed by dissolution of atmospheric carbon dioxide or other acidic oxides in the presence of water vapor. This spot then behaves as a cathode.
Galvanic corrosion
Galvanic corrosion occurs when two different metals have physical or electrical contact with each other and are immersed in a common electrolyte, or when the same metal is exposed to electrolyte with different concentrations. In a galvanic couple, the more active metal (the anode) corrodes at an accelerated rate and the more noble metal (the cathode) corrodes at a slower rate. When immersed separately, each metal corrodes at its own rate. What type of metal(s) to use is readily determined by following the galvanic series. For example, zinc is often used as a sacrificial anode for steel structures. Galvanic corrosion is of major interest to the marine industry and also anywhere water (containing salts) contacts pipes or metal structures.
Factors such as relative size of anode, types of metal, and operating conditions (temperature, humidity, salinity, etc.) affect galvanic corrosion. The surface area ratio of the anode and cathode directly affects the corrosion rates of the materials. Galvanic corrosion is often prevented by the use of sacrificial anodes.
Galvanic series
In any given environment (one standard medium is aerated, room-temperature seawater), one metal will be either more noble or more active than others, based on how strongly its ions are bound to the surface. Two metals in electrical contact share the same electrons, so that the "tug-of-war" at each surface is analogous to competition for free electrons between the two materials. Using the electrolyte as a host for the flow of ions in the same direction, the noble metal will take electrons from the active one. The resulting mass flow or electric current can be measured to establish a hierarchy of materials in the medium of interest. This hierarchy is called a galvanic series and is useful in predicting and understanding corrosion.
Corrosion removal
Often, it is possible to chemically remove the products of corrosion. For example, phosphoric acid in the form of naval jelly is often applied to ferrous tools or surfaces to remove rust. Corrosion removal should not be confused with electropolishing, which removes some layers of the underlying metal to make a smooth surface. For example, phosphoric acid may also be used to electropolish copper but it does this by removing copper, not the products of copper corrosion.
Resistance to corrosion
Some metals are more intrinsically resistant to corrosion than others (for some examples, see galvanic series). There are various ways of protecting metals from corrosion (oxidation) including painting, hot-dip galvanization, cathodic protection, and combinations of these.
Intrinsic chemistry
The materials most resistant to corrosion are those for which corrosion is thermodynamically unfavorable. Any corrosion products of gold or platinum tend to decompose spontaneously into pure metal, which is why these elements can be found in metallic form on Earth and have long been valued. More common "base" metals can only be protected by more temporary means.
Some metals have naturally slow reaction kinetics, even though their corrosion is thermodynamically favorable. These include such metals as zinc, magnesium, and cadmium. While corrosion of these metals is continuous and ongoing, it happens at an acceptably slow rate. An extreme example is graphite, which releases large amounts of energy upon oxidation, but has such slow kinetics that it is effectively immune to electrochemical corrosion under normal conditions.
Passivation
Passivation refers to the spontaneous formation of an ultrathin film of corrosion products, known as a passive film, on the metal's surface that act as a barrier to further oxidation. The chemical composition and microstructure of a passive film are different from the underlying metal. Typical passive film thickness on aluminium, stainless steels, and alloys is within 10 nanometers. The passive film is different from oxide layers that are formed upon heating and are in the micrometer thickness range – the passive film recovers if removed or damaged whereas the oxide layer does not. Passivation in natural environments such as air, water and soil at moderate pH is seen in such materials as aluminium, stainless steel, titanium, and silicon.
Passivation is primarily determined by metallurgical and environmental factors. The effect of pH is summarized using Pourbaix diagrams, but many other factors are influential. Some conditions that inhibit passivation include high pH for aluminium and zinc, low pH or the presence of chloride ions for stainless steel, high temperature for titanium (in which case the oxide dissolves into the metal, rather than the electrolyte) and fluoride ions for silicon. On the other hand, unusual conditions may result in passivation of materials that are normally unprotected, as the alkaline environment of concrete does for steel rebar. Exposure to a liquid metal such as mercury or hot solder can often circumvent passivation mechanisms.
It has been shown using electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy that during iron passivation, an n-type semiconductor Fe(III) oxide grows at the interface with the metal that leads to the buildup of an electronic barrier opposing electron flow and an electronic depletion region that prevents further oxidation reactions. These results indicate a mechanism of "electronic passivation". The electronic properties of this semiconducting oxide film also provide a mechanistic explanation of corrosion mediated by chloride, which creates surface states at the oxide surface that lead to electronic breakthrough, restoration of anodic currents, and disruption of the electronic passivation mechanism.
Corrosion in passivated materials
Passivation is extremely useful in mitigating corrosion damage, however even a high-quality alloy will corrode if its ability to form a passivating film is hindered. Proper selection of the right grade of material for the specific environment is important for the long-lasting performance of this group of materials. If breakdown occurs in the passive film due to chemical or mechanical factors, the resulting major modes of corrosion may include pitting corrosion, crevice corrosion, and stress corrosion cracking.
Pitting corrosion
Certain conditions, such as low concentrations of oxygen or high concentrations of species such as chloride which compete as anions, can interfere with a given alloy's ability to re-form a passivating film. In the worst case, almost all of the surface will remain protected, but tiny local fluctuations will degrade the oxide film in a few critical points. Corrosion at these points will be greatly amplified, and can cause corrosion pits of several types, depending upon conditions. While the corrosion pits only nucleate under fairly extreme circumstances, they can continue to grow even when conditions return to normal, since the interior of a pit is naturally deprived of oxygen and locally the pH decreases to very low values and the corrosion rate increases due to an autocatalytic process. In extreme cases, the sharp tips of extremely long and narrow corrosion pits can cause stress concentration to the point that otherwise tough alloys can shatter; a thin film pierced by an invisibly small hole can hide a thumb sized pit from view. These problems are especially dangerous because they are difficult to detect before a part or structure fails. Pitting remains among the most common and damaging forms of corrosion in passivated alloys, but it can be prevented by control of the alloy's environment.
Pitting results when a small hole, or cavity, forms in the metal, usually as a result of de-passivation of a small area. This area becomes anodic, while part of the remaining metal becomes cathodic, producing a localized galvanic reaction. The deterioration of this small area penetrates the metal and can lead to failure. This form of corrosion is often difficult to detect because it is usually relatively small and may be covered and hidden by corrosion-produced compounds.
Weld decay and knifeline attack
Stainless steel can pose special corrosion challenges, since its passivating behavior relies on the presence of a major alloying component (chromium, at least 11.5%). Because of the elevated temperatures of welding and heat treatment, chromium carbides can form in the grain boundaries of stainless alloys. This chemical reaction robs the material of chromium in the zone near the grain boundary, making those areas much less resistant to corrosion. This creates a galvanic couple with the well-protected alloy nearby, which leads to "weld decay" (corrosion of the grain boundaries in the heat affected zones) in highly corrosive environments. This process can seriously reduce the mechanical strength of welded joints over time.
A stainless steel is said to be "sensitized" if chromium carbides are formed in the microstructure. A typical microstructure of a normalized type 304 stainless steel shows no signs of sensitization, while a heavily sensitized steel shows the presence of grain boundary precipitates. The dark lines in the sensitized microstructure are networks of chromium carbides formed along the grain boundaries.
Special alloys, either with low carbon content or with added carbon "getters" such as titanium and niobium (in types 321 and 347, respectively), can prevent this effect, but the latter require special heat treatment after welding to prevent the similar phenomenon of "knifeline attack". As its name implies, corrosion is limited to a very narrow zone adjacent to the weld, often only a few micrometers across, making it even less noticeable.
Crevice corrosion
Crevice corrosion is a localized form of corrosion occurring in confined spaces (crevices), to which the access of the working fluid from the environment is limited. Formation of a differential aeration cell leads to corrosion inside the crevices. Examples of crevices are gaps and contact areas between parts, under gaskets or seals, inside cracks and seams, spaces filled with deposits, and under sludge piles.
Crevice corrosion is influenced by the crevice type (metal-metal, metal-non-metal), crevice geometry (size, surface finish), and metallurgical and environmental factors. The susceptibility to crevice corrosion can be evaluated with ASTM standard procedures. A critical crevice corrosion temperature is commonly used to rank a material's resistance to crevice corrosion.
Hydrogen grooving
In the chemical industry, hydrogen grooving is the corrosion of piping at grooves created by the interaction of a corrosive agent, corroded pipe constituents, and hydrogen gas bubbles. For example, when sulfuric acid (H2SO4) flows through steel pipes, the iron in the steel reacts with the acid to form a passivation coating of iron sulfate (FeSO4) and hydrogen gas (H2). The iron sulfate coating will protect the steel from further reaction; however, if hydrogen bubbles contact this coating, it will be removed. Thus, a groove can be formed by a travelling bubble, exposing more steel to the acid, causing a vicious cycle. The grooving is exacerbated by the tendency of subsequent bubbles to follow the same path.
High-temperature corrosion
High-temperature corrosion is chemical deterioration of a material (typically a metal) as a result of heating. This non-galvanic form of corrosion can occur when a metal is subjected to a hot atmosphere containing oxygen, sulfur ("sulfidation"), or other compounds capable of oxidizing (or assisting the oxidation of) the material concerned. For example, materials used in aerospace, power generation, and even in car engines must resist sustained periods at high temperature, during which they may be exposed to an atmosphere containing the potentially highly-corrosive products of combustion.
Some products of high-temperature corrosion can potentially be turned to the advantage of the engineer. The formation of oxides on stainless steels, for example, can provide a protective layer preventing further atmospheric attack, allowing for a material to be used for sustained periods at both room and high temperatures in hostile conditions. Such high-temperature corrosion products, in the form of compacted oxide layer glazes, prevent or reduce wear during high-temperature sliding contact of metallic (or metallic and ceramic) surfaces. Thermal oxidation is also commonly used to produce controlled oxide nanostructures, including nanowires and thin films.
Microbial corrosion
Microbial corrosion, or commonly known as microbiologically influenced corrosion (MIC), is a corrosion caused or promoted by microorganisms, usually chemoautotrophs. It can apply to both metallic and non-metallic materials, in the presence or absence of oxygen. Sulfate-reducing bacteria are active in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic); they produce hydrogen sulfide, causing sulfide stress cracking. In the presence of oxygen (aerobic), some bacteria may directly oxidize iron to iron oxides and hydroxides, other bacteria oxidize sulfur and produce sulfuric acid causing biogenic sulfide corrosion. Concentration cells can form in the deposits of corrosion products, leading to localized corrosion.
Accelerated low-water corrosion (ALWC) is a particularly aggressive form of MIC that affects steel piles in seawater near the low water tide mark. It is characterized by an orange sludge, which smells of hydrogen sulfide when treated with acid. Corrosion rates can be very high and design corrosion allowances can soon be exceeded leading to premature failure of the steel pile. Piles that have been coated and have cathodic protection installed at the time of construction are not susceptible to ALWC. For unprotected piles, sacrificial anodes can be installed locally to the affected areas to inhibit the corrosion or a complete retrofitted sacrificial anode system can be installed. Affected areas can also be treated using cathodic protection, using either sacrificial anodes or applying current to an inert anode to produce a calcareous deposit, which will help shield the metal from further attack.
Metal dusting
Metal dusting is a catastrophic form of corrosion that occurs when susceptible materials are exposed to environments with high carbon activities, such as synthesis gas and other high-CO environments. The corrosion manifests itself as a break-up of bulk metal to metal powder. The suspected mechanism is firstly the deposition of a graphite layer on the surface of the metal, usually from carbon monoxide (CO) in the vapor phase. This graphite layer is then thought to form metastable M3C species (where M is the metal), which migrate away from the metal surface. However, in some regimes, no M3C species is observed indicating a direct transfer of metal atoms into the graphite layer.
Protection from corrosion
Various treatments are used to slow corrosion damage to metallic objects which are exposed to the weather, salt water, acids, or other hostile environments. Some unprotected metallic alloys are extremely vulnerable to corrosion, such as those used in neodymium magnets, which can spall or crumble into powder even in dry, temperature-stable indoor environments unless properly treated.
Surface treatments
When surface treatments are used to reduce corrosion, great care must be taken to ensure complete coverage, without gaps, cracks, or pinhole defects. Small defects can act as an "Achilles' heel", allowing corrosion to penetrate the interior and causing extensive damage even while the outer protective layer remains apparently intact for a period of time.
Applied coatings
Plating, painting, and the application of enamel are the most common anti-corrosion treatments. They work by providing a barrier of corrosion-resistant material between the damaging environment and the structural material. Aside from cosmetic and manufacturing issues, there may be tradeoffs in mechanical flexibility versus resistance to abrasion and high temperature. Platings usually fail only in small sections, but if the plating is more noble than the substrate (for example, chromium on steel), a galvanic couple will cause any exposed area to corrode much more rapidly than an unplated surface would. For this reason, it is often wise to plate with active metal such as zinc or cadmium. If the zinc coating is not thick enough the surface soon becomes unsightly with rusting obvious. The design life is directly related to the metal coating thickness.
Painting either by roller or brush is more desirable for tight spaces; spray would be better for larger coating areas such as steel decks and waterfront applications. Flexible polyurethane coatings, like Durabak-M26 for example, can provide an anti-corrosive seal with a highly durable slip resistant membrane. Painted coatings are relatively easy to apply and have fast drying times although temperature and humidity may cause dry times to vary.
Reactive coatings
If the environment is controlled (especially in recirculating systems), corrosion inhibitors can often be added to it. These chemicals form an electrically insulating or chemically impermeable coating on exposed metal surfaces, to suppress electrochemical reactions. Such methods make the system less sensitive to scratches or defects in the coating, since extra inhibitors can be made available wherever metal becomes exposed. Chemicals that inhibit corrosion include some of the salts in hard water (Roman water systems are known for their mineral deposits), chromates, phosphates, polyaniline, other conducting polymers, and a wide range of specially designed chemicals that resemble surfactants (i.e., long-chain organic molecules with ionic end groups).
Anodization
Aluminium alloys often undergo a surface treatment. Electrochemical conditions in the bath are carefully adjusted so that uniform pores, several nanometers wide, appear in the metal's oxide film. These pores allow the oxide to grow much thicker than passivating conditions would allow. At the end of the treatment, the pores are allowed to seal, forming a harder-than-usual surface layer. If this coating is scratched, normal passivation processes take over to protect the damaged area.
Anodizing is very resilient to weathering and corrosion, so it is commonly used for building facades and other areas where the surface will come into regular contact with the elements. While being resilient, it must be cleaned frequently. If left without cleaning, panel edge staining will naturally occur. Anodization is the process of converting an anode into cathode by bringing a more active anode in contact with it.
Biofilm coatings
A new form of protection has been developed by applying certain species of bacterial films to the surface of metals in highly corrosive environments. This process increases the corrosion resistance substantially. Alternatively, antimicrobial-producing biofilms can be used to inhibit mild steel corrosion from sulfate-reducing bacteria.
Controlled permeability formwork
Controlled permeability formwork (CPF) is a method of preventing the corrosion of reinforcement by naturally enhancing the durability of the cover during concrete placement. CPF has been used in environments to combat the effects of carbonation, chlorides, frost, and abrasion.
Cathodic protection
Cathodic protection (CP) is a technique to control the corrosion of a metal surface by making it the cathode of an electrochemical cell. Cathodic protection systems are most commonly used to protect steel pipelines and tanks; steel pier piles, ships, and offshore oil platforms.
Sacrificial anode protection
For effective CP, the potential of the steel surface is polarized (pushed) more negative until the metal surface has a uniform potential. With a uniform potential, the driving force for the corrosion reaction is halted. For galvanic CP systems, the anode material corrodes under the influence of the steel, and eventually it must be replaced. The polarization is caused by the current flow from the anode to the cathode, driven by the difference in electrode potential between the anode and the cathode. The most common sacrificial anode materials are aluminum, zinc, magnesium and related alloys. Aluminum has the highest capacity, and magnesium has the highest driving voltage and is thus used where resistance is higher. Zinc is general purpose and the basis for galvanizing.
A number of problems are associated with sacrificial anodes. Among these, from an environmental perspective, is the release of zinc, magnesium, aluminum and heavy metals such as cadmium into the environment including seawater. From a working perspective, sacrificial anodes systems are considered to be less precise than modern cathodic protection systems such as Impressed Current Cathodic Protection (ICCP) systems. Their ability to provide requisite protection has to be checked regularly by means of underwater inspection by divers. Furthermore, as they have a finite lifespan, sacrificial anodes need to be replaced regularly over time.
Impressed current cathodic protection
For larger structures, galvanic anodes cannot economically deliver enough current to provide complete protection. Impressed current cathodic protection (ICCP) systems use anodes connected to a DC power source (such as a cathodic protection rectifier). Anodes for ICCP systems are tubular and solid rod shapes of various specialized materials. These include high silicon cast iron, graphite, mixed metal oxide or platinum coated titanium or niobium coated rod and wires.
Anodic protection
Anodic protection impresses anodic current on the structure to be protected (opposite to the cathodic protection). It is appropriate for metals that exhibit passivity (e.g. stainless steel) and suitably small passive current over a wide range of potentials. It is used in aggressive environments, such as solutions of sulfuric acid. Anodic protection is an electrochemical method of corrosion protection by keeping metal in passive state
Rate of corrosion
The formation of an oxide layer is described by the Deal–Grove model, which is used to predict and control oxide layer formation in diverse situations. A simple test for measuring corrosion is the weight loss method. The method involves exposing a clean weighed piece of the metal or alloy to the corrosive environment for a specified time followed by cleaning to remove corrosion products and weighing the piece to determine the loss of weight. The rate of corrosion (R) is calculated as
R
k
W
ρ
A
t
{\displaystyle R={\frac {kW}{\rho At}}}
where k is a constant, W is the weight loss of the metal in time t, A is the surface area of the metal exposed, and ρ is the density of the metal (in g/cm3).
Other common expressions for the corrosion rate is penetration depth and change of mechanical properties.
Economic impact
In 2002, the US Federal Highway Administration released a study titled "Corrosion Costs and Preventive Strategies in the United States" on the direct costs associated with metallic corrosion in the US industry. In 1998, the total annual direct cost of corrosion in the US roughly $276 billion (or 3.2% of the US gross domestic product at the time). Broken down into five specific industries, the economic losses are $22.6 billion in infrastructure, $17.6 billion in production and manufacturing, $29.7 billion in transportation, $20.1 billion in government, and $47.9 billion in utilities.
Rust is one of the most common causes of bridge accidents. As rust displaces a much higher volume than the originating mass of iron, its build-up can also cause failure by forcing apart adjacent components. It was the cause of the collapse of the Mianus River Bridge in 1983, when support bearings rusted internally and pushed one corner of the road slab off its support. Three drivers on the roadway at the time died as the slab fell into the river below. The following NTSB investigation showed that a drain in the road had been blocked for road re-surfacing, and had not been unblocked; as a result, runoff water penetrated the support hangers. Rust was also an important factor in the Silver Bridge disaster of 1967 in West Virginia, when a steel suspension bridge collapsed within a minute, killing 46 drivers and passengers who were on the bridge at the time.
Similarly, corrosion of concrete-covered steel and iron can cause the concrete to spall, creating severe structural problems. It is one of the most common failure modes of reinforced concrete bridges. Measuring instruments based on the half-cell potential can detect the potential corrosion spots before total failure of the concrete structure is reached.
Until 20–30 years ago, galvanized steel pipe was used extensively in the potable water systems for single and multi-family residents as well as commercial and public construction. Today, these systems have long ago consumed the protective zinc and are corroding internally, resulting in poor water quality and pipe failures. The economic impact on homeowners, condo dwellers, and the public infrastructure is estimated at $22 billion as the insurance industry braces for a wave of claims due to pipe failures.
Corrosion in nonmetals
Most ceramic materials are almost entirely immune to corrosion. The strong chemical bonds that hold them together leave very little free chemical energy in the structure; they can be thought of as already corroded. When corrosion does occur, it is almost always a simple dissolution of the material or chemical reaction, rather than an electrochemical process. A common example of corrosion protection in ceramics is the lime added to soda–lime glass to reduce its solubility in water; though it is not nearly as soluble as pure sodium silicate, normal glass does form sub-microscopic flaws when exposed to moisture. Due to its brittleness, such flaws cause a dramatic reduction in the strength of a glass object during its first few hours at room temperature.
Corrosion of polymers
Polymer degradation involves several complex and often poorly understood physiochemical processes. These are strikingly different from the other processes discussed here, and so the term "corrosion" is only applied to them in a loose sense of the word. Because of their large molecular weight, very little entropy can be gained by mixing a given mass of polymer with another substance, making them generally quite difficult to dissolve. While dissolution is a problem in some polymer applications, it is relatively simple to design against.
A more common and related problem is "swelling", where small molecules infiltrate the structure, reducing strength and stiffness and causing a volume change. Conversely, many polymers (notably flexible vinyl) are intentionally swelled with plasticizers, which can be leached out of the structure, causing brittleness or other undesirable changes.
The most common form of degradation, however, is a decrease in polymer chain length. Mechanisms which break polymer chains are familiar to biologists because of their effect on DNA: ionizing radiation (most commonly ultraviolet light), free radicals, and oxidizers such as oxygen, ozone, and chlorine. Ozone cracking is a well-known problem affecting natural rubber for example. Plastic additives can slow these process very effectively, and can be as simple as a UV-absorbing pigment (e.g., titanium dioxide or carbon black). Plastic shopping bags often do not include these additives so that they break down more easily as ultrafine particles of litter.
Corrosion of glass
Glass is characterized by a high degree of corrosion resistance. Because of its high water resistance, it is often used as primary packaging material in the pharmaceutical industry since most medicines are preserved in a watery solution. Besides its water resistance, glass is also robust when exposed to certain chemically-aggressive liquids or gases.
Glass disease is the corrosion of silicate glasses in aqueous solutions. It is governed by two mechanisms: diffusion-controlled leaching (ion exchange) and hydrolytic dissolution of the glass network. Both mechanisms strongly depend on the pH of contacting solution: the rate of ion exchange decreases with pH as 10−0.5pH, whereas the rate of hydrolytic dissolution increases with pH as 100.5pH.
Mathematically, corrosion rates of glasses are characterized by normalized corrosion rates of elements NRi (g/cm2·d) which are determined as the ratio of total amount of released species into the water Mi (g) to the water-contacting surface area S (cm2), time of contact t (days), and weight fraction content of the element in the glass fi:
N
R
i
M
i
S
f
i
t
{\displaystyle \mathrm {NR} _{i}={\frac {M_{i}}{Sf_{i}t}}}
.
The overall corrosion rate is a sum of contributions from both mechanisms (leaching + dissolution): NRi=NRxi+NRh. Diffusion-controlled leaching (ion exchange) is characteristic of the initial phase of corrosion and involves replacement of alkali ions in the glass by a hydronium (H3O+) ion from the solution. It causes an ion-selective depletion of near surface layers of glasses and gives an inverse-square-root dependence of corrosion rate with exposure time. The diffusion-controlled normalized leaching rate of cations from glasses (g/cm2·d) is given by:
N
R
x
i
2
ρ
D
i
π
t
{\displaystyle \mathrm {NR} x_{i}=2\rho {\sqrt {\frac {D_{i}}{\pi t}}}}
,
where t is time, Di is the ith cation effective diffusion coefficient (cm2/d), which depends on pH of contacting water as Di = Di0·10–pH, and ρ is the density of the glass (g/cm3).
Glass network dissolution is characteristic of the later phases of corrosion and causes a congruent release of ions into the water solution at a time-independent rate in dilute solutions (g/cm2·d):
N
R
h
ρ
r
h
{\displaystyle \mathrm {NR} h=\rho r_{h}}
,
where rh is the stationary hydrolysis (dissolution) rate of the glass (cm/d). In closed systems, the consumption of protons from the aqueous phase increases the pH and causes a fast transition to hydrolysis. However, a further saturation of solution with silica impedes hydrolysis and causes the glass to return to an ion-exchange; e.g., diffusion-controlled regime of corrosion.
In typical natural conditions, normalized corrosion rates of silicate glasses are very low and are of the order of 10−7 to 10−5 g/(cm2·d). The very high durability of silicate glasses in water makes them suitable for hazardous and nuclear waste immobilisation.
Glass corrosion tests
There exist numerous standardized procedures for measuring the corrosion (also called chemical durability) of glasses in neutral, basic, and acidic environments, under simulated environmental conditions, in simulated body fluid, at high temperature and pressure, and under other conditions.
The standard procedure ISO 719 describes a test of the extraction of water-soluble basic compounds under neutral conditions: 2 g of glass, particle size 300–500 μm, is kept for 60 min in 50 mL de-ionized water of grade 2 at 98 °C; 25 mL of the obtained solution is titrated against 0.01 mol/L HCl solution. The volume of HCl required for neutralization is classified according to the table below.
The standardized test ISO 719 is not suitable for glasses with poor or not extractable alkaline components, but which are still attacked by water; e.g., quartz glass, B2O3 glass or P2O5 glass.
Usual glasses are differentiated into the following classes:
Hydrolytic class 1 (Type I): This class, which is also called neutral glass, includes borosilicate glasses (e.g., Duran, Pyrex, Fiolax). Glass of this class contains essential quantities of boron oxides, aluminium oxides and alkaline earth oxides. Through its composition neutral glass has a high resistance against temperature shocks and the highest hydrolytic resistance. Against acid and neutral solutions it shows high chemical resistance, because of its poor alkali content against alkaline solutions.
Hydrolytic class 2 (Type II): This class usually contains sodium silicate glasses with a high hydrolytic resistance through surface finishing. Sodium silicate glass is a silicate glass, which contains alkali- and alkaline earth oxide and primarily sodium oxide and calcium oxide.
Hydrolytic class 3 (Type III): Glass of the 3rd hydrolytic class usually contains sodium silicate glasses and has a mean hydrolytic resistance, which is two times poorer than of type 1 glasses. Acid class DIN 12116 and alkali class DIN 52322 (ISO 695) are to be distinguished from the hydrolytic class DIN 12111 (ISO 719).

Corrosion engineering is an engineering specialty that applies scientific, technical, engineering skills, and knowledge of natural laws and physical resources to design and implement materials, structures, devices, systems, and procedures to manage corrosion.
From a holistic perspective, corrosion is the phenomenon of metals returning to the state they are found in nature. The driving force that causes metals to corrode is a consequence of their temporary existence in metallic form. To produce metals starting from naturally occurring minerals and ores, it is necessary to provide a certain amount of energy, e.g. Iron ore in a blast furnace. It is therefore thermodynamically inevitable that these metals when exposed to various environments would revert to their state found in nature. Corrosion and corrosion engineering thus involves a study of chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, electrochemistry and materials science.
General background
Generally related to metallurgy or materials science, corrosion engineering also relates to non-metallics including ceramics, cement, composite material, and conductive materials such as carbon and graphite. Corrosion engineers often manage other not-strictly-corrosion processes including (but not restricted to) cracking, brittle fracture, crazing, fretting, erosion, and more typically categorized as Infrastructure asset management. In the 1990s, Imperial College London even offered a Master of Science degree entitled "The Corrosion of Engineering Materials". UMIST – University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology and now part of the University of Manchester also offered a similar course. Corrosion Engineering master's degree courses are available worldwide and the curricula contain study material about the control and understanding of corrosion. Ohio State University has a corrosion center named after one of the more well known corrosion engineers Mars G Fontana.
Corrosion costs
In the year 1995, it was reported that the costs of corrosion nationwide in the USA were nearly $300 billion per year. This confirmed earlier reports of damage to the world economy caused by corrosion.
Zaki Ahmad, in his book Principles of corrosion engineering and corrosion control,
states that "Corrosion engineering is the application of the principles evolved from corrosion science to minimize or prevent corrosion". Shreir et al. suggest likewise in their large, two volume work entitled Corrosion. Corrosion engineering involves designing of corrosion prevention schemes and implementation of specific codes and practices. Corrosion prevention measures, including Cathodic protection, designing to prevent corrosion and coating of structures fall within the regime of corrosion engineering. However, corrosion science and engineering go hand-in-hand and they cannot be separated: it is a permanent marriage to produce new and better methods of protection from time to time. This may include the use of Corrosion inhibitors. In the Handbook of corrosion engineering, the author Pierre R. Roberge states "Corrosion is the destructive attack of a material by reaction with its environment. The serious consequences of the corrosion process have become a problem of worldwide significance."
Costs are not only monetary. There is a financial cost and also a waste of natural resources. In 1988 it was estimated that one tonne of metal was converted completely to rust every ninety seconds in the United Kingdom. There is also the cost of human lives. Failure whether catastrophic or otherwise due to corrosion has cost human lives.
Corrosion engineering and corrosion societies and associations
Corrosion engineering groups have formed around the world to educate, prevent, slow, and manage corrosion. These include the National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE), the European Federation of Corrosion (EFC), and the Australasian Corrosion Association. The corrosion engineer's main task is to economically and safely manage the effects of corrosion of materials.
Notable contributors to the field
Some of the most notable contributors to the Corrosion Engineering discipline include among others:
Michael Faraday (1791–1867)
Marcel Pourbaix (1904–1998)
Herbert H. Uhlig (1907–1993)
Ulick Richardson Evans (1889–1980)
Mars Guy Fontana (1910–1988)
Melvin Romanoff ( -1970)
Types of corrosion situations
Corrosion engineers and consultants tend to specialize in Internal or External corrosion scenarios. In both, they may provide corrosion control recommendations, failure analysis investigations, sell corrosion control products, or provide installation or design of corrosion control and monitoring systems. Every material has its weakness. Aluminum, galvanized/zinc coatings, brass, and copper do not survive well in very alkaline or very acidic pH environments. Copper and brasses do not survive well in high nitrate or ammonia environments. Carbon steels and iron do not survive well in low soil resistivity and high chloride environments. High chloride environments can even overcome and attack steel encased in normally protective concrete. Concrete does not survive well in high sulfate and acidic environments. And nothing survives well in high sulfide and low redox potential environments with corrosive bacteria. This is called Biogenic sulfide corrosion.
External corrosion
Underground soil side corrosion
Underground corrosion control engineers collect soil samples to test soil chemistry for corrosive factors such as pH, minimum soil resistivity, chlorides, sulfates, ammonia, nitrates, sulfide, and redox potential. They collect samples from the depth that infrastructure will occupy, because soil properties may change from strata to strata. The minimum test of in-situ soil resistivity is measured using the Wenner four pin method if often performed to judge a site's corrosivity. However, during a dry period, the test may not show actual corrosivity, since underground condensation can leave soil in contact with buried metal surfaces more moist. This is why measuring a soil's minimum or saturated resistivity is important. Soil resistivity testing alone does not identify corrosive elements. Corrosion engineers can investigate locations experiencing active corrosion using above ground survey methods and design corrosion control systems such as cathodic protection to stop or reduce the rate of corrosion.
Geotechnical engineers typically do not practice corrosion engineering, and refer clients to a corrosion engineer if soil resistivity is below 3,000 ohm-cm or less, depending the soil corrosivity categorization table they read. Unfortunately, an old dairy farm can have soil resistivities above 3,000 ohm-cm and still contain corrosive ammonia and nitrate levels that corrode copper piping or grounding rods. A general saying about corrosion is, "If the soil is great for farming, it is great for corrosion."
Underwater external corrosion
Underwater corrosion engineers apply the same principals used in underground corrosion control but use specially trained and certified scuba divers for condition assessment, and corrosion control system installation and commissioning. The main difference being in the type of reference cells used to collect voltage readings. Corrosion of piles and the legs of oil and gas rigs are of particular concern. This includes rigs in the North Sea off the coast of the United Kingdom and the Gulf of Mexico.
Atmospheric corrosion
Atmospheric corrosion generally refers to general corrosion in a non-specific environment. Prevention of atmospheric corrosion is typically handled by use of materials selection and coatings specifications. The use of zinc coatings also known as galvanization on steel structures is a form of cathodic protection where the zinc acts as a sacrificial anode and also a form of coating. Small scratches are expected to occur in the galvanized coating over time. The zinc being more active in the galvanic series corrodes in preference to the underlying steel and the corrosion products fil the scratch preventing further corrosion. As long as the scratches are fine, condensation moisture should not corrode the underlying steel as long as both the zinc and steel are in contact. As long as there is moisture, the zinc corrodes and eventually disappears. Impressed current cathodic protection is also used.
Splash zone and water spray corrosion
The usual definition of a splash zone is the area just above and just below the average water level of a body of water. It also includes areas that may be subject to water spray and mist.
A significant amount of corrosion of fences is due to landscaper tools scratching fence coatings and irrigation sprinklers spraying these damaged fences. Recycled water typically has a higher salt content than potable drinking water, meaning that it is more corrosive than regular tap water. The same risk from damage and water spray exists for above ground piping and backflow preventers. Fiberglass covers, cages, and concrete footings have worked well to keep tools at an arm's length. Even the location where a roof drain splashes down can matter. Drainage from a home's roof valley can fall directly down onto a gas meter causing its piping to corrode at an accelerated rate reaching 50% wall thickness within 4 years. It is the same effect as a splash zone in the ocean, or in a pool with lot of oxygen and agitation that removes material as it corrodes.
Tanks or structural tubing such as bench seat supports or amusement park rides can accumulate water and moisture if the structure does not allow for drainage. This humid environment can then lead to internal corrosion of the structure affecting the structural integrity. The same can happen in tropical environments leading to external corrosion. This would include Corrosion in ballast tanks on ships.
Pipeline corrosion
Hazardous materials are often carried in pipelines and thus their structural integrity is of paramount importance. Corrosion of a pipeline can thus have grave consequences. One of the methods used to control pipeline corrosion is by the use of Fusion bonded epoxy coatings. DCVG is used to monitor it. Impressed current cathodic protection is also used.
Corrosion in the petrochemical industry
The Petrochemical industry typically encounters aggressive corrosive media. These include sulfides and high temperatures. Corrosion control and solutions are thus necessary for the world economy. Scale formation in injection water presents its own problems with regard to corrosion and thus for the corrosion engineer.
Corrosion in ballast tanks
Ballast tanks on ships contain the fuels for corrosion. Water is one and air is usually present too and the water can become stagnant. Structural integrity is important for safety and to avoid marine pollution. Coatings have become the solution of choice to reduce the amount of corrosion in ballast tanks. Impressed current cathodic protection has also been used. Likewise sacrificial anode cathodic protection is also used. Since chlorides vastly accelerate corrosion, ballast tanks of marine vessels are particularly susceptible.
Corrosion in the railway industry
It has been stated that one of the biggest challenges in the United Kingdom railway industry is corrosion. The biggest problem is that corrosion can affect the structural integrity of passenger carrying railway carriages thus affecting their crashworthiness. Other railway structures and assets can also be affected. The Permanent Way Institution give lectures on the subject periodically. In January 2018 corrosion of a metal structure caused the emergency closure of Liverpool Lime Street railway station.
Galvanic corrosion
Galvanic corrosion (also called bimetallic corrosion) is an electrochemical process in which one metal (more active one) corrodes preferentially when it is in electrical contact with another dissimilar metal, in the presence of an electrolyte. A similar galvanic reaction is exploited in primary cells to generate a useful electrical voltage to power portable devices – a classic example being a cell with zinc and copper electrodes. Galvanic corrosion is also exploited when a sacrificial metal is used in cathodic protection. Galvanic corrosion happens when there are an active metal and a more noble metal in contact in the presence of electrolyte.
Pitting corrosion
Pitting corrosion, or pitting, is extremely localized corrosion that leads to the creation of small holes in the material – nearly always a metal. The failures resulting from this form of corrosion can be catastrophic. With general corrosion it is easier to predict the amount of material that will be lost over time and this can be designed into the engineered structure. Pitting, like crevice corrosion can cause a catastrophic failure with very little loss of material. Pitting corrosion happens for passive materials. The classic reaction mechanism has been ascribed to Ulick Richardson Evans.
Crevice corrosion
Crevice corrosion is a type of localized corrosion with a very similar mechanism to pitting corrosion.
Stress corrosion cracking
Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is the growth of a crack in a corrosive environment. It requires three conditions to take place: 1)corrosive environment 2)stress 3)susceptible material. SCC can lead to unexpected sudden and hence catastrophic failure of normally ductile metals under tensile stress. This is usually exacerbated at elevated temperature. SCC is highly chemically specific in that certain alloys are likely to undergo SCC only when exposed to a small number of chemical environments. It is common for SCC to go undetected prior to failure. SCC usually quite progresses rapidly after initial crack initiation, and is seen more often in alloys as opposed to pure metals. The corrosion engineer thus must be aware of this phenomenon.
Filiform Corrosion
Filiform corrosion may be considered as a type of crevice corrosion and is sometimes seen on metals coated with an organic coating (paint). Filiform corrosion is unusual in that it does not weaken or destroy the integrity of the metal but only affects the surface appearance.
Corrosion fatigue
This form of corrosion is usually caused by a combination of corrosion and cyclic stress. Measuring and controlling this is difficult because of the many factors at play including the nature or form of the stress cycle. The stress cycles cause localized work hardening. So avoiding stress concentrators such as holes etc would be good corrosion engineering design.
Selective leaching
This form of corrosion occurs principally in metal alloys. The less noble metal of the alloy, is selectively leached from the alloy. Removal of zinc from brass is a more common example.
Microbial corrosion
Biocorrosion, biofouling and corrosion caused by living organisms are now known to have an electrochemistry foundation. Other marine creatures such as mussels, worms and even sponges have been known to degrade engineering materials.
Hydrogen damage
Hydrogen damage is caused by hydrogen atoms (as opposed to hydrogen molecules in the gaseous state), interacting with metal.
Erosion corrosion
Erosion corrosion is a form of corrosion damage usually on a metal surface caused by turbulence of a liquid or solid containing liquid and the metal surface. Aluminum can be particularly susceptible due to the fact that the aluminum oxide layer which affords corrosion protection to the underlying metal is eroded away.
Hydrogen embrittlement
This phenomenon describes damage to the metal (nearly always iron or steel) at low temperature by diffusible hydrogen.
Hydrogen can embrittle a number of metals and steel is one of them. It tends to happen to harder and higher tensile steels. Hydrogen can also embrittle aluminum at high temperatures.). Titanium metal and alloys are also susceptible.
High temperature corrosion
High-temperature corrosion typically occurs in environments that have heat and chemical such as hydrocarbon fuel sources but also other chemicals enable this form of corrosion.
Thus it can occur in boilers, automotive engines driven by diesel or gasoline, metal production furnaces and flare stacks from oil and gas production. High temperature oxidation of metals would also be included.
Internal corrosion
Internal corrosion is occasioned by the combined effects and severity of four modes of material deterioration, namely: general corrosion, pitting corrosion, microbial corrosion, and fluid corrosivity. The same principals of external corrosion control can be applied to internal corrosion but due to accessibility, the approaches can be different. Thus special instruments for internal corrosion control and inspection are used that are not used in external corrosion control. Video scoping of pipes and high tech smart pigs are used for internal inspections. The smart pigs can be inserted into a pipe system at one point and "caught" far down the line. The use of corrosion inhibitors, material selection studies, and internal coatings are mainly used to control corrosion in piping while anodes along with coatings are used to control corrosion in tanks.
In-depth corrosion calculation are performed during material selection studies, and there are many different corrosion models and calculation methods (softwares) that are prevalent in industry. i.e ECE, Predict, De Waard, Norsok M-506 etc.
Internal corrosion challenges apply to the following amongst others: Water pipes; Gas pipes; Oil pipes and Water tank reservoirs.
Good design to prevent corrosion situations
Corrosion engineering involves good design. Using a rounded edge rather than an acute edge reduces corrosion. Also not coupling by welding or other joining method, two dissimilar metals to avoid galvanic corrosion is best practice. Avoiding having a small anode (or anodic material) next to a large cathode (or cathodic material) is good practice. As an example, weld material should always be more noble than the surrounding material. Corrosion in ballast tanks on marine vessels can be an issue if good design is not undertaken. Other examples include simple design such as material thickness. In a known corrosion situation the material can just be made thicker so it will take much longer to corrode.
Material selection to prevent corrosion situations
Correct selection of the material by the design engineer affects the design life of a structure or pipeline which is very relevant in the Oil and Gas Industry. Sometimes stainless steel is not the correct choice and carbon steel would be better. There is a misconception that stainless steel has excellent corrosion resistance and will not corrode. This is not always the case and should not be used to handle deoxygenated solutions for example, as the stainless steel relies on oxygen to maintain passivation and is also susceptible to crevice corrosion.
Galvanizing or hot-dip galvanizing is used to coat steel with a layer of metallic zinc. Lead or antimony are often added to the molten zinc bath, and also other metals have been studied.
Controlling the environment to prevent corrosion situations
One example of controlling the environment to prevent or reduce corrosion is the practice of storing aircraft in deserts. These storage places are usually called aircraft boneyards. The climate is usually arid so this and other factors make it an ideal environment.
Use of corrosion inhibitors to prevent corrosion
An inhibitor is usually a material added in a small quantity to a particular environment that reduces the rate of corrosion. They may be classified a number of ways but are usually 1) Oxidizing; 2) Scavenging; 3) Vapor-phase inhibitors; Sometimes they are called Volatile corrosion inhibitor 4) Adsorption inhibitors; 5) Hydrogen-evolution retarder. Another way to classify them is chemically. As there is more concern for the environment and people are more keen to use Renewable resources, there is ongoing research to modify these materials so they may be used as corrosion inhibitors.
Use of coatings to prevent corrosion
A coating or paint is usually a fluid applied covering applied to a surface in contact with a corrosive situation such as the atmosphere. The surface is usually called the substrate. In corrosion prevention applications the purpose of applying the coating is mainly functional rather than decorative. Paints and lacquers are coatings that have dual uses of protecting the substrate and being decorative, but paint on large industrial pipes as well as preventing corrosion is also used for identification e.g. red for fire-fighting control etc. Functional coatings may be applied to change the surface properties of the substrate, such as adhesion, wettability, corrosion resistance, or wear resistance. In the automotive industry, coatings are used to control corrosion but also for aesthetic reasons. Coatings are also extensively used in marine environments to control corrosion in an oceanic environment. Corrosion will eventually breakthrough a coating and so have a design life before maintenance.
Societies
Corrosion societies are professional societies for corrosion engineers and scientists for the purpose of sharing research, experience and discoveries. They include:
The Australasian Corrosion Association (ACA) was incorporated in 1958 as a not-for-profit primarily operating in Australasia.
NACE International claimed to be the worldwide society with universally accepted standards. After various mergers, it was renamed as Association for Materials Protection and Performance. It is active in more than 130 countries and has more than 40,000 members.
The European Federation of Corrosion (EFC) is an association of individual European country Corrosion societies joined in a larger umbrella group known as the European Federation of Corrosion. They meet at an annual congress named EUROCORR.
The Institute of Corrosion (ICorr) is based in Northampton UK and was founded in 1959. They are members of the Science Council.

In lithic analysis in archaeology, the cortex is the outer layer of rock formed on the exterior of raw materials by chemical and mechanical weathering processes. It is often recorded on the dorsal surface of flakes using a three-class system: primary, secondary, and tertiary. The amount of cortex present on artifacts in an archaeological assemblage may indicate the extent of lithic reduction that has occurred. Primary, secondary, and tertiary designations for flakes are generally determined by relative amounts of cortex presented on the dorsal surface. Some archaeologists classify flakes with no cortex as tertiary, flakes with some cortex as secondary, and flakes with all cortex as primary, whereas others make distinctions at every third or half of the dorsal surface covered. Differences in how archaeologists classify the amount of cortex and the results of experimental archaeological tests demonstrating the moderate correlation between the amount of cortex and stage of reduction, have limited the validity of assumptions based on the amount of cortex solely.

The creation of life from clay (or soil, earth, dust, or mud) appears throughout world religions and mythologies, some of the earliest occurring in the creation myths about the origin of man in the cosmology of the ancient Near East. The idea occurs in both biblical cosmology and Quranic cosmology. The clay represents an unformed, chaotic material which is shaped and given form by the gods in a creative process. A related motif is the use of clay to seed or create the world. In southwest Asia, the clay-shaping was cast as a magical act. In the same way that humans would use clay to make terracotta images of their gods, so the gods moulded humans out of clay in their godlike form. They were described as obtaining this material by pinching off pieces of wet mud.
The most famous example of this is in the biblical Book of Genesis (2:7), where Adam is made out of dust, an idea that appears across the Bible (Job 10:9; Psalm 90:3; 104:29; Isaiah 29:16, etc.). The idea is also found in the Epic of Gilgamesh where the goddess Aruru creates Enkidu from clay, in Egyptian mythology where Khnum makes man out of clay, and various Greek texts crediting Prometheus (one of the Titans) with doing the same. Later, the concept would influence art history, such as the impact it had on the work of Giorgio Vasari.
List of examples by religion
Judaism
The Book of Genesis 2:7 states that man was made out of dust. The name Adam derives from the Hebrew word adāmāh, which literally means "red clay".
In Jewish folklore, a golem (Hebrew: גולם) is an animated anthropomorphic being that is created entirely from inanimate matter, usually clay or mud.
Christianity
Many of the Church Fathers, including John Chrysostom and Basil of Caesarea, advocated the creation of Adam from clay. John, Basil, and others interpreted this as God creating man from a low material, which should lead to humility on the part of man.
The creation of Adam from clay was a popular idea in Syriac Christianity, appearing in the hymns of Ephrem the Syrian and Narsai, and in the Cave of Treasures.
Islam
In the cosmology of the Quran, man is said to have been created from clay (Quran 23:12), referred to by the Arabic ṭīn. Adam is also said to have been made from dust (turāb). Like other traditions, the concept has negative connotations in the Quran, and the use of this matter to make Adam is cited as justification by Iblis (Satan) to reject God's command to prostrate to him.
List of examples by region and culture
Ancient Near Eastern
The Epic of Gilgamesh states that the goddess Aruru created humans and animals out of clay. The epic goes on to narrate how Aruru also creates Enkidu out of a pinch of clay.
The Sumerian myth of the Ninhursag states that humans were fashioned from clay to serve the gods (see Enki and the Making of Man) as part of a competition. In the Akkadian version, the Epic of Atrahasis, Enki advises that a god is killed and that Nintur (the birth goddess) mix his flesh and blood with clay to create humans. A similar idea is seen in the Enuma Elish, where Enki creates man out of the blood of a slain revel god.
The Babylonian Epic of Atrahasis states that humans were created by Nintu (Ninhursag) from mixing clay with the blood of a sacrificed god. In context, the elder gods forced the younger gods to do all the hard labor so the younger gods devised a plan to create humans to do their bidding instead. The sacrificed god Ilawela (also written as Geshtu-(E), Geshtu, Gestu, or We-ila) is a minor god of intelligence (the text states this quite clearly: "Ilawela ...had intelligence").
Contrary to common misconception, the Babylonian creation epic Enuma Elish says that humans were created from a combination of blood and bone, and not clay. Marduk instructed Enki (Ea) to do this, which he did using the blood of Tiamat's fallen consort, Kingu.
Egyptian
In Ancient Egypt, it was the Egyptian god Khnum that was most commonly associated with the creation of humans. Khnum is said to create human children from clay before placing them into their mother's womb. Khnum was the crafter of all living things, including some gods, on the potter's wheel: "You are the master of the wheel, who is pleased to model on the wheel . . . you have made humans on the wheel, you have created the gods; you have modelled the small and large cattle; you have formed everything on your wheel each day, in your name Khnum the potter".
Greek
In Greek mythology, according to Pseudo-Apollodorus, Prometheus molded men out of water and earth. Near the town of Panopeus, the remaining used clay was allegedly still present in historical times as two cart-sized rocks that smelled like a human body. Myths about Prometheus were inspired by Near Eastern Myths about Enki.
Also in Greek mythology, Prometheus moulds a clay statue of Athena, the goddess of wisdom to whom he is devoted, and gives it life from a stolen sunbeam.
Pandora, from Greek mythology, was fashioned from clay and given the quality of "naïve grace combined with feeling".
East Asian
According to Chinese mythology, (see Chu Ci and Imperial Readings of the Taiping Era), Nüwa molded figures from the yellow earth, giving them life and the ability to bear children.
The Ainu historically believed that Kamui built the Ainu on the back of a giant fish using clay, sticks, and water.
Although there is not a single creation myth that is common among the Korean people, in a shamanic hymn for a shamanic ritual called "Seng-gut(셍굿)" that originated from Hamgyong Province, there is a section that men and women were created from loess(which is called Hwangto in korea), though the hymn does not specify who the creator is.
South Asian
The Birhor of India believe that a leech was responsible for bringing the creator god mud which would later be made into humans.
The Gondi people believe that Nantu (the moon) was made of mud that Kumpara spat onto his son.
The Garo people in India believe that a beetle gave clay to the creator god Tatara-Rabuga, who made humanity from it.
Andamanese Mythology women were fashioned from clay (while the men emerged from split bamboo).
Southeast Asian
In Vietnamese mythology, the Ngọc Hoàng and the Twelve Bà mụ created people from clay.
Central Asian
Central Asian mythology, including Altaic and Mongolian, have stories about how the god Ulgen created the first man, Erlik, from clay floating on the surface of water.
Buryatian mythology has the god Sombov create humans from clay and wool.
African
The Yoruba culture holds that the god Obatala, likewise, created the human race from clay.
The Efé people have a creation story in which the first man was made of clay and skin.
According to Malagasy mythology, the sky deity Zanahary and the earth deity Ratovantany created the Malagasy people by breathing life into clay dolls.
The Songye people have a creation myth involving two gods, Mwile and Kolombo, creating humans out of clay as part of a rivalry.
Some of the Dinka of Sudan believe Nhialac, the creator, formed the humans Abuk and Garang from clay. The clay was put into pots to grow, and eventually came out as fully-grown adults. Other narratives attribute the creation of humanity to Nhialac blowing his nose or believe that humans came from the sky and were placed upon a river as full-grown adults.
The Dogon people believe the Earth goddess was made when Amma flung earth into the primordial void.
In a Madagascar myth, two gods create human beings: the earth god forms them from wood and clay, the god of heaven gives them life. Human beings die so that they may return to the origins of their being.
Polynesian
In Hawaiian tradition, the first man was composed of muddy water and his female counterpart was taken from his side parts (story may be partially or entirely Christianized).
Tane, in Polynesian mythology, created the original woman from red clay.
Norse
In Skaldskaparmal, the god Thor encounters a giant named Mokkurkalfe, who was made from clay.
Americas
According to the beliefs of some Indigenous Americans, the Earth-maker formed the figure of many men and women, which he dried in the sun and into which he breathed life.
Iñupiat mythology has Raven create a human out of clay, who would later become Tornaq, the first demon.
According to Inca mythology, the creator god, Viracocha, formed humans from clay on his second attempt at creating living creatures.
The Aymaran creation myth involves the making of humans from clay.
In fiction
The superhero Wonder Woman was sculpted from clay by her mother Hippolyta and given life by the Greek gods.
In science
The role of clay minerals in abiogenesis was suggested in a 2013 paper titled Clay Minerals and the Origin of Life.

The Creveney shale mining operation, managed by Société des Schistes et Pétroles de Franche-Comté (SPF) for the manufacture of the fuel known as Natioline, comprises an open-pit oil shale mine and an oil distillation plant. It is located at Creveney, in the Haute-Saône region of eastern France.
Between 1929 and 1936, this industry mined 20,000 tons of pyro schist of the Toarcian age, with industrial production in 1934 employing around 80 people. This rock is distilled to obtain shale oil, which is then refined. To promote this fuel, Natioline, a car raid was organized in the French colonies, the “African technical cruise."
At the beginning of the 21st century, some (polluted) remnants of the installations and the extraction area remain, but the most important will be demolished before 2022.
Situation
The 1,760-hectare concession covers the whole of Creveney and parts of neighboring Saulx, Châtenois, Colombotte, Calmoutier, Montcey, and Colombier. It is located between Vesoul and Lure in the Haute-Saône department, in the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region.
Geology
The Creveney concession exploits a small part of a vast oil shale deposit comprising two main groups. The first of these is located in the center of the Haute-Saône department, in the synclinal valleys of the Ognon and Saône rivers, and extends from Grattery to Gouhenans via Vesoul and Creveney, where it outcrops at various points. The second is located in the south-east of the department, on the north-western slopes of the pre-Jurassic hills, and extends from Châlonvillars to Fallon. Some fifty communes are affected, representing 10% of the department's territory. The thickness of the layer is generally around twenty meters, with a maximum of 34 meters.
This pyro schist deposit, known as “schists-carton,” dates back to the Toarcian (-182 to -174 million years); more specifically, to the Lower Toarcian, a period during which a major geological event known as the Oceanic Anoxic Event (OEA) took place. This corresponds to a period of global warming that destabilized methane hydrates in seabed sediments, releasing large quantities of methane gas and causing seabed anoxia over a large part of the globe. The result is mass extinctions of ocean fauna and the accumulation of organic matter. The absence of benthic and burrowing organisms preserves the original sediment laminae. Black clays with a laminated structure and a cardboard-like consistency, known as cardboard schists, are formed. This facies is known from outcrops and boreholes in many basins, including the Paris and Aquitaine Basins, where it is only a few meters thick. Cardboard shales contain only fossils of pelagic organisms (fish, microalgae including Coccolithophoridae, etc.). The duration of this event is estimated at 600,000 years.
The volume of mineable material in the concession alone is estimated at one billion tons of shale capable of producing 50 million tons of oil (a yield of 5%). The exploited layer measures 15 meters on average. It slopes slightly to the south and extends between Colombier and Velleminfroy.
History
The deposit was discovered in the mid-19th century, and in 1849 a concession application was filed by Vésul merchants to mine the Saulx-Creveney sector. The application was refused by the Prefect of Haute-Saône, the mining engineer deeming the schist deposit insufficient and fearing stock market speculation.
The concession was granted in 1929. In October, the Société des Schistes et Pétroles de Franche-Comté was created by René Petit, an industrialist from Luxeuil-les-Bains. A special branch line was created with the Creveney-Saulx railway station for the transport of refined products, also via RN 19 and RN 57. The plant was built in 1930 and went into production in 1934.
Operations ceased in November 1934 due to a lack of capital. The business was relaunched in March 1935 during a visit by Marshal Pétain, but on June 6 the company filed for bankruptcy again. The business was relaunched in July 1936, and the facilities were bought by the Pechelbronn oil company, which quickly dismantled them before abandoning the site.
Extraction
To mine the deposit, the topsoil is scraped away to reveal the shale, which is then blasted. Excavators are used to load the rock into minecarts pulled by Decauville locomotives. Mining waste is used to backfill the open-cast mine.
Treatment
The extracted materials are first broken with a sledgehammer (1), then pass through mechanical hammers (2) before being crushed in two cylindrical crushers (3) to achieve a grain size of 15 mm. The fine material is then screened to separate dust (4) before being stored in a drying silo (5), which feeds different types of furnaces where it is heated between 450 and 500 °C in a confined, oxygen-free environment.
The Pumpherston retort (6), measuring one meter in diameter and built from cast iron and refractory bricks, stands 18 meters high and processes 3 to 5 cubic meters every thirty hours. A horizontal rotary kiln (7), a continuous mechanical type made of steel, can process 12 cubic meters per day. There is also a gasifier furnace (8) and another furnace designed specifically by René Petit (9), capable of processing 4 tons per hour.
The shale oil obtained by vapor condensation at the furnace exit undergoes a three-phase distillation process. Heating (10) extracts gas oil and crude gasoline. The gasoline then passes through a distillation column (11), producing various refined products. Residues are processed in a tar boiler (12) to produce bitumen, used for road construction. A final refining step removes sulfur and phenol.
Since the processing facilities require large amounts of water, gas, and electricity, they have water supply system and are self-sufficient in gas through their furnaces. However, the electricity supplied by the Ronchamp thermal power plant is insufficient. To compensate, the plant operates its own thermal power station with a capacity of approximately 300 kW. Steam is generated by a semi-tubular boiler to drive the turbine, which powers the electric generator. The equipment is manufactured by Alstom in Belfort. In case of failure, a locomobile can operate a backup generator.
Production
A total of 20,000 tons of shale were extracted, yielding 500 tons of shale oil, 90 tons of gasoline, 62 tons of refined gasoline, 25 tons of refined heavy gasoline, 36 tons of diesel, 135 tons of fuel oil, and 220 tons of bitumen. By 1933, the plant was capable of producing 5,000 liters of crude oil per day, which yielded 2,000 liters of gasoline.
Natioline
The fuel produced at Creveney was marketed in drums bearing the colors of the French flag, under the name Natioline, a marketing strategy linked to the economic patriotism of the time. In 1934, management decided to organize an “African technical cruise,” an automobile raid in the French colonies similar to the Yellow Expedition organized by Citroën. The expedition was led by Charles Roux. The convoy made up of two trucks, refuels at the Creveney factory before setting off for Algeria, crossing the Sahara to the French West Africa, then the French Equatorial Africa, and finally returning to France via Senegal and Morocco. The results are positive: the convoy suffers only a few breakdowns, not attributable to fuel.
Autonomy tests were carried out with Renault military liaison vehicles, as well as with a Citroën C6F, to compare the difference in distance covered by the car with 5 liters of Natioline and 5 liters of conventional petrol. The range covered by Natioline was 39 km, compared with 34 km for ordinary petrol. Creveney gasoline is blended with denatured alcohol to maintain fuel stability down to -21°C.
Corporate aspects
The Board of Directors is made up of seven members, including Albert Bikel (Chairman) and René Petit (Founder and Managing Director).
The company employs around 80 people: a head of technical services, a mining engineer, a secretary, a draughtsman, two excavator drivers, two assistants, a hooker, a locomotive driver, a driller and his assistant, 5 backfillers, a porter from Ronchamp mines, seven crusher workers, three furnace shifts (a department manager, two shift supervisors, six maintenance workers and two laborers), a refinery engineer, two foremen, three men per shift with the department manager, a power station manager, six plant workers, four maintenance workers, two laboratory workers and a storekeeper.
Employees work 8 hours a day, 48 hours a week. Several workers play together in the Creveney-Saulx soccer club on Sundays.
Reconversion
At the beginning of the 21st century, the remains of the open-cast mine, a reinforced concrete silo, a metal reservoir, furnace foundations, and scattered concrete blocks remained. The site was used by the Direction Départementale de l'Équipement (DDE - Departmental Equipment Directorate) until its demise in 2009.
In 2013, the site was acquired by the Direction Départementale des Territoires (DDT - Departmental Directorate of Territories) of Haute-Saône. The Direction régionale de l'environnement, de l'aménagement et du logement (DREAL - Regional Directorate for the Environment, Planning and Housing) then carried out a study into soil pollution and site safety. Traces of hydrocarbons, in particular PAHs, were found in the soil, but as the latter was impermeable, there was no risk of contamination of the water table or watercourses. The risk is linked to possible leakage and runoff of these pollutants via the Bognon stream, the natural outlet for runoff from the Durgeon watershed. A fence is erected to prevent access to the site.
Before 2022, the site was sold by the department to a private company which demolished the ruins of the concrete installations. The site was then subject to illegal dumping and burning.

In materials science, critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) is the shear stress that is necessary to initiate slip on a particular slip system in a grain. Resolved shear stress (RSS) is the shear component of an applied tensile or compressive stress resolved in the slip direction on a slip plane that is neither perpendicular nor parallel to the stress axis. The RSS is related to the applied stress by a geometrical factor, m, typically called the Schmid factor:
τ
RSS
σ
app
m
σ
app
(
cos
⁡
ϕ
cos
⁡
λ
)
{\displaystyle \tau _{\text{RSS}}=\sigma _{\text{app}}m=\sigma _{\text{app}}(\cos \phi \cos \lambda )}
where
σ
a
p
p
{\displaystyle \sigma _{\mathrm {app} }}
is the magnitude of the applied tensile stress,
ϕ
{\displaystyle \phi }
is the angle between the normal of the slip plane and the direction of the applied force, and
λ
{\displaystyle \lambda }
is the angle between the slip direction and the direction of the applied force. The Schmid factor is most applicable to FCC single-crystal metals, but for polycrystal metals the Taylor factor has been shown to be more accurate. The CRSS is the value of resolved shear stress at which yielding of the grain occurs, marking the onset of plastic deformation. CRSS, therefore, is a material property and is not dependent on the applied load or grain orientation. The CRSS is related to the observed yield strength of the material by the maximum value of the Schmid factor:
σ
y
τ
CRSS
m
max
{\displaystyle \sigma _{y}={\frac {\tau _{\text{CRSS}}}{m_{\text{max}}}}}
CRSS is a constant for crystal families. Hexagonal close-packed crystals, for example, have three main families - basal, prismatic, and pyramidal - with different values for the critical resolved shear stress.
Slip systems and resolved shear stress
In crystalline metals, slip occurs in specific directions on crystallographic planes, and each combination of slip direction and slip plane will have its own Schmid factor. As an example, for a face-centered cubic (FCC) system the primary slip plane is {111} and primary slip directions exist within the <110> permutation families. The Schmid Factor for an axial applied stress in the
[
001
]
{\displaystyle [001]}
direction, along the primary slip plane of
(
111
)
{\displaystyle (111)}
, with the critical applied shear stress acting in the
[
110
]
{\displaystyle [110]}
direction can be calculated by quickly determining if any of the dot product between the axial applied stress and slip plane, or dot product of axial applied stress and shear stress direction equal to zero. For the example cited above, the dot product of axial applied stress in the
[
001
]
{\displaystyle [001]}
direction and shear stress resulting from the former in the
[
110
]
{\displaystyle [110]}
direction yields a zero. For such a case, it is suitable to find a permutation of the family of the <110> direction. For the example completed below, the
[
101
]
{\displaystyle [101]}
permutation direction for the shear stress slip direction has been chosen:
m
(
1
∗
0
)
+
(
0
∗
0
)
+
(
1
∗
1
)
(
(
1
)
2
+
0
2
+
1
2
)
1
/
2
(
0
2
+
0
2
+
1
2
)
1
/
2
∗
(
1
∗
0
)
+
(
1
∗
0
)
+
(
1
∗
1
)
(
1
2
+
1
2
+
1
2
)
1
/
2
(
0
2
+
0
2
+
1
2
)
1
/
2
1
6
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}m_{=}&{\frac {(1*0)+(0*0)+(1*1)}{((1)^{2}+0^{2}+1^{2})^{1/2}(0^{2}+0^{2}+1^{2})^{1/2}}}*{\frac {(1*0)+(1*0)+(1*1)}{(1^{2}+1^{2}+1^{2})^{1/2}(0^{2}+0^{2}+1^{2})^{1/2}}}=&{\frac {1}{\sqrt {6}}}\end{aligned}}}
In a single crystal sample, the macroscopic yield stress will be determined by the Schmid factor of the single grain. Thus, in general, different yield strengths will be observed for applied stresses along different crystallographic directions. In polycrystalline specimens, the yield strength of each grain is different depending on its maximum Schmid factor, which indicates the operational slip system(s). The macroscopically observed yield stress will be related to the material's CRSS by an average Schmid factor, which is roughly 1/3.06 for FCC and 1/2.75 for body-centered cubic (BCC) structures.
The onset of plasticity in polycrystals is influenced by the number of available slip systems to accommodate incompatibilities at the grain boundaries. In the case of two adjacent, randomly oriented grains, one grain will have a larger Schmid factor and thus a smaller yield stress. Under load, this "weaker" grain will yield prior to the "stronger" grain, and as it deforms a stress concentration will build up in the stronger grain near the boundary between them. This stress concentration will activate dislocation motion in the available glide planes. These dislocations are geometrically necessary to ensure that the strain in each grain is equivalent at the grain boundary, so that the compatibility criteria are satisfied. G. I. Taylor showed that a minimum of five active slip systems are required to accommodate an arbitrary deformation. In crystal structures with fewer than 5 active slip systems, such as hexagonal close-packed (HCP) metals, the specimen will exhibit brittle failure instead of plastic deformation.
Effects of temperature and solid solution strengthening
At lower temperatures, more energy (i.e. - larger applied stress) is required to activate some slip systems. This is particularly evident in BCC materials, in which not all 5 independent slip systems are thermally activated at temperatures below the ductile-to-brittle transition temperature, or DBTT, so BCC specimens therefore become brittle. In general BCC metals have higher critical resolved shear stress values compared to FCC. However, the relationship between the CRSS and temperature and strain rate is worth examining further.
To understand the relationship between stress and temperature observed, we first divide the critical resolved shear stress into the sum of two components: an athermal term described as
τ
a
{\displaystyle \tau _{a}}
and a thermally dependent term known as
τ
∗
{\displaystyle \tau ^{*}}
where
τ
CRSS
τ
a
+
τ
∗
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\tau _{\text{CRSS}}=\tau _{a}+\tau ^{*}\end{aligned}}}
τ
a
{\displaystyle \tau _{a}}
can be attributed to the stresses involved with dislocation motion while dislocations move in long-range internal stress fields. These long-range stresses arise from the presence of other dislocations.
τ
∗
{\displaystyle \tau ^{*}}
however is attributed to short range internal stress fields that arise from defect atoms or precipitates within the lattice that are obstacles for dislocation glide. With increasing temperature, the dislocations within the material have sufficient energy to overcome these short-range stresses. This explains the trend in region I where stress decreases with temperature. At the boundary between region’s I and II, the
τ
∗
{\displaystyle \tau ^{*}}
term is effectively zero and the critical resolved shear stress is completely described by the athermal term, i.e. long-range internal stress fields are still significant. In the third region, diffusive processes begin to play a significant role in plastic deformation of the material and so the critically resolved shear stress decreases once again with temperature. Within region three, the equation suggested earlier no longer applies. Region I has a temperature upper bound of approximately
T
≤
0.25
T
m
{\displaystyle T\leq 0.25T_{m}}
while region III occurs at values
T
≥
0.7
T
m
{\displaystyle T\geq 0.7T_{m}}
where
T
m
{\displaystyle T_{m}}
is the melting temperature of the material. The figure also shows the effect of increased strain rate generally increasing the critical resolved shear stress for a constant temperature as this increases the dislocation density in the material. Note that for intermediate temperatures, i.e. region II, there is a region where the strain rate has no effect on the stress. Increasing the strain rate does shift the graph to the right as more energy is needed to balance the short-term stresses with the resulting increased dislocation density.
The thermal component,
τ
∗
{\displaystyle \tau ^{*}}
can be expressed in the following manner.
(
τ
∗
τ
0
∗
)
1
2
1
−
(
T
T
c
)
1
2
{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\left({\frac {\tau ^{*}}{\tau _{0}^{*}}}\right)^{\frac {1}{2}}=1-\left({\frac {T}{T_{c}}}\right)^{\frac {1}{2}}\end{aligned}}}
Where
τ
0
∗
{\displaystyle \tau _{0}^{*}}
is the thermal component at 0 K and
T
c
{\displaystyle T_{c}}
is the temperature at which the thermal energy is sufficient to overcome the obstacles causing stress, i.e. the temperature at the transition from 1 to 2. The above equation has been verified experimentally. In general, the CRSS increases as the homologous temperature decreases because it becomes energetically more costly to activate the slip systems, although this effect is much less pronounced in FCC.
Solid solution strengthening also increases the CRSS compared to a pure single component material because the solute atoms distort the lattice, preventing the dislocation motion necessary for plasticity. With dislocation motion inhibited, it becomes harder to activate the necessary 5 independent slip systems, so the material becomes stronger and more brittle.

A sword's crossguard or cross-guard is a bar between the blade and hilt, typically perpendicular to them, intended to protect the wielder's hand and fingers from opponents' weapons as well as from sliding onto their own blade. Each of the projecting arms extending to either side is known as a quillon or quillion; these may be straight, curved, or otherwise shaped depending on the style of the weapon, and in some designs they may also be used to catch, bind, or control an opponent's blade.
History
The crossguard was developed in the European sword around the 10th century for the protection of the wielder's hand.The earliest forms may have developed from late Roman and Migration Period swords such as the spatha, though the precise origins remain uncertain.There are many examples of crossguards on Sasanian Persian Swords beginning from the early 3rd century. There are examples of swords with developed guards in Sasanian Persia beginning from the early 3rd century, though these differ in form from the later crossguards of medieval European swords. Crossguards were not only used to counter enemy attacks, but also to improve grip. They were later seen in late Viking swords. Crossguards became a standard feature of the Norman sword of the 11th century, and remained characteristic of the knightly arming sword throughout the high and late medieval period. Early crossguards were straight metal bars, sometimes tapering towards the outer ends. While this simple type was never discontinued, more elaborate forms developed alongside it in the course of the Middle Ages. The crossguard could be waisted or bent in the 12th and 13th century.
Beginning in the 13th or 14th century, swords were almost universally fitted with a so-called chappe or rain-guard, a piece of leather fitted to the crossguard. The purpose of this leather is not entirely clear, but it seems to have originated as a part of the scabbard, functioning as a lid when the sword was in the scabbard.
In the 14th to 15th century, many more elaborate forms were tried. A feature of such late medieval forms is the cusp or écusson, a protrusion of the crossguard in the center where it is fitted on the blade. Also from the 14th century, the leather chappe is sometimes replaced with a metal sheet. An early example of this is a sword dated to c. 1320–40 kept at the Kelvingrove Museum in Glasgow. A later example is the "Monza sword" of Estore Visconti (early 15th century), where the rain-guard is of silver and decorated with a floral motif.
After the end of the Middle Ages, crossguards became more elaborate, forming first quillons and then, through the addition of guard branches, the basket hilt, which offered more protection to the unarmored hand.
In Europe, namely the area under the strong influence of the Roman Catholic Church and to a lesser degree the Eastern Orthodox Church, the shape of the crossguard bore certain religious significance. It has been theorized that the rise of the crossguard in the classic cruciform style was due to the influence of Christianity. It so happens to parallel the rising of Church power at the advent of the knightly cruciform sword as well as the rapid decline of the cruciform style directly following the Protestant Reformation.
Types
Ewart Oakeshott in chapter 4 of his The Sword in the Age of Chivalry (1964) classifies medieval cross-guards into twelve types:
a plain horizontal bar, tapering towards the end. This is the basic shape found from the late Viking era through the 17th century.
waisted type, popular in the 15th century.
a relatively short bar with a rectangular cross-section. Popular during 1150–1250 and again during 1380–1430.
the terminals of the bar are bent towards the blade.
"bow tie" style with widened and flattened terminals.
a curved or bent variant of type 5.
the bar has a flat cross-section and is bent towards the blade; popular in the 14th century.
bent terminals as in style 4, but a more elaborate form with a hexagonal cross-section of the part fitted around the tang and a pronounced écusson, popular in the late medieval period.
an elaborate late medieval type with the bar bent towards the blade and a flat diamond- or V-shaped cross-section and a pronounced écusson.
the arms of the bar taper towards the hilt rather than away from it; mostly also with a pronounced écusson.
knobbed terminals, with round or rectangular cross-section, popular during the 15th to 16th centuries
the bar curves strongly in the horizontal plane, forming an S-shape; this type dates to the end of the medieval period and is transitional to the early modern quillon types.
The medieval dagger in the 14th and 15th century also adopted a variant with quillons styled after the hilt of a sword. Quillon-daggers remained popular in the 16th century after the sword type it resembled had fallen out of use.

Crown molding (moulding in British and Commonwealth English) is a cornice of decorative molding installed where an interior wall meets the ceiling, and over doors, windows, pilasters and cabinets.
Historically made of plaster or wood, modern crown molding may consist of a single element or be composed of multiple components.
Application
Crown molding is typically installed at the intersection of walls and ceiling, but may also be used above doors, windows, or cabinets. Crown treatments made out of wood may be a single piece of trim, or a build-up of multiple components to create a more elaborate look. The main element, or the only in a plain installation, is a piece of trim that is sculpted on one side and flat on the other, with standard angles forming 90-degrees milled on both its top and bottom edges. When placed against a wall and ceiling a triangular void is created behind it. Cutting inside and outside corners requires complex cuts at standard angles, typically done with powered compound miter saws that feature detents at these angles to aid the user.
An alternative method, coping, is a two step process that begins with cutting a simple miter on both mating trim ends, then uses a coping saw to back-cut at least one of the miters along its profiled edge to provide relief during installation.
Simplified crown installation is possible when using manufactured corner blocks, requiring only simple butt cuts on each end of lengths of trim. Plastic and foam versions of crown are now available, typically with corner blocks, for easy installation by DIY home improvement enthusiasts.
Angle calculations
Fitting crown molding requires a cut at the correct combination of miter angle and bevel angle. The calculation of these angles is affected by two variables: (1) the spring angle (or crown angle, typically sold in 45° and 38° formats), and (2) the wall angle.
Pre-calculated crown molding tables or software can be used to facilitate the determination of the correct angles. Given the spring angle and the wall angle, the formulas used to calculate the miter angle and the bevel angle are:
Miter angle
arctan
⁡
(
sin
⁡
(
spring angle
)
tan
⁡
(
wall angle
/
2
)
)
{\displaystyle =\arctan \left({\frac {\sin {({\text{spring angle}})}}{\tan {({\text{wall angle}}/2)}}}\right)}
Bevel angle
arcsin
⁡
(
cos
⁡
(
spring angle
)
×
cos
⁡
(
wall angle
/
2
)
)
{\displaystyle =\arcsin \left(\cos {({\text{spring angle}})}\times \cos {({\text{wall angle}}/2)}\right)}
Gallery

The Crown of Thorns (puzzle work) is a woodworking technique of tramp art using interlocking wooden pieces that are notched to intersect at right angles forming joints and self-supporting objects, objects that have a "prickly" and transparent quality. Common examples include wreath-shaped picture frames that look similar to Jesus' "crown of thorns".
Larger-scale crowns may use the principles of tensegrity structures, where the wooden sticks provide rigidity and separate cables in tension carry the forces that hold them together.

A cruck or crook frame is a curved timber, one of a pair, which support the roof of a building, historically used in England and Wales. This type of timber framing consists of long, generally naturally curved, timber members that lean inwards and form the ridge of the roof. These posts are then generally secured by a horizontal beam which then forms an "A" shape. Several of these "crooks" are constructed on the ground and then lifted into position. They are then joined together by either solid walls or cross beams which aid in preventing 'racking' (the action of each individual frame going out of square with the rest of the frame, and thus risking collapse).
Etymology
The term crook or cruck comes from Middle English crok(e), from Old Norse krāka, meaning "hook". This is also the origin of the word "crooked", meaning bent, twisted or deformed, and also the crook used by shepherds and symbolically by bishops.
Use
Crucks were chiefly used in the medieval period for structures such as houses and large tithe barns, which were entirely timber-framed. They were also often used for the roofs of stone-walled buildings such as churches. However, these bent timbers were comparatively rare, as they were also in high demand for the shipbuilding industry.
Where naturally curved timbers were convenient and available, carpenters continued to use them at much later dates. For instance, base crucks are found in the roofs of the residential range of Staple Inn Buildings, Nos. 337 – 338, High Holborn, London. This is dated by documented records to 1586, with significant alterations in 1886 (under Alfred Waterhouse) and further restorations in 1936, and 1954–55. Despite these changes Cecil Hewett, an authority on English Historic Carpentry, has stated that these 16th-century crucks are original.
The large main barn of the manor house Barlow Woodseats Hall features what is claimed to be the longest continuously roofed cruck barn in Derbyshire, and possibly even in the United Kingdom.
An example of a Yorkshire cruck barn complete with a heather-thatched roof can be found in Appletreewick. The crucks or cruck "blades" are a single oak tree riven (split) in two to form an equally shaped A frame.
Rare examples of cruck framing are found on continental Europe such as in Belgium, Flanders, Northern France and the Corrèze region of France. No cruck frames are known to have been built in North America though there are rare examples of what may be an upper cruck or knee rafters.
History
The oldest surviving crucks with dates confirmed by tree ring analysis date from around the middle of the 13th century. They may have declined due to providing an inconveniently shaped space in cases where an upper floor was used.
Revival
During the current revival of green-oak framing for new building work, which has occurred mainly since approximately 1980 in the UK, genuine cruck frames have quite often been included in traditionally carpentered structures.
There are also some fine, historically authentic reconstructions. For instance, Tithe Barn, Pilton, Glastonbury, whose original roof was destroyed by lightning, has been carefully rebuilt in 2005 from curved oaks. The necessary trees were sought out, using special templates, in English woodlands.
Types
True cruck or full cruck: The blades, straight or curved, extend from a foundation near the ground to the ridge. A full cruck does not need a tie beam and may be called a "full cruck - open" or with a tie beam a "full cruck - closed".
Base cruck: The tops of the blades are truncated by the first transverse member such as by a tie beam.
Raised cruck: The blades land on masonry wall and extend to ridge.
Middle cruck: The blades land on masonry wall and are truncated by collar beam.
Upper cruck: The blades land on tie beam, very similar to knee rafters.
Jointed cruck: The blades made from two pieces joined near eaves. They can be joined in at least five ways.
The apex of a cruck frame also helps to define the style and region of the cruck. Different types include the butt apex, halved, housed, yoke, and crossed forms.

Cryptocrystalline is a rock texture made up of such minute crystals that its crystalline nature is only vaguely revealed even microscopically in thin section by transmitted polarized light. Among the sedimentary rocks, chert and flint are cryptocrystalline. Carbonado, a form of diamond, is also cryptocrystalline. Volcanic rocks, especially of the felsic type such as felsites and rhyolites, may have a cryptocrystalline groundmass as distinguished from pure obsidian (felsic) or tachylyte (mafic), which are natural rock glasses. Agate and onyx are examples of cryptocrystalline silica (chalcedony). The quartz crystals in chalcedony are so tiny that they cannot be distinguished with the naked eye.

A crystallite is a small or even microscopic crystal which forms, for example, during the cooling of many materials. Crystallites are also referred to as grains.
Bacillite is a type of crystallite. It is rodlike with parallel longulites.
Structure
The orientation of crystallites can be random with no preferred direction, called random texture, or directed, possibly due to growth and processing conditions. While the structure of a single crystal is highly ordered and its lattice is continuous and unbroken, amorphous materials, such as glass and many polymers, are non-crystalline and do not display any structures, as their constituents are not arranged in an ordered manner. Polycrystalline structures and paracrystalline phases are in between these two extremes. Polycrystalline materials, or polycrystals, are solids that are composed of many crystallites of varying size and orientation. Most materials are polycrystalline, made of a large number crystallites held together by thin layers of amorphous solid. Most inorganic solids are polycrystalline, including all common metals, many ceramics, rocks, and ice. A related term oligocrystalline material is a microstructure consisting of a few coarse grains, often columnar and parallel to the longitudinal ingot axis. This microstructure can be found in the ingots produced by electron beam melting.
The areas where crystallites meet are known as grain boundaries.
Size
Crystallite size in monodisperse microstructures is usually approximated from X-ray diffraction patterns and grain size by other experimental techniques like transmission electron microscopy. Solid objects large enough to see and handle are rarely composed of a single crystal, except for a few cases (gems, silicon single crystals for the electronics industry, certain types of fiber, single crystals of a nickel-based superalloy for turbojet engines, and some ice crystals which can exceed 0.5 meters in diameter). The crystallite size can vary from a few nanometers to several millimeters.
Effects on material physical properties
The extent to which a solid is crystalline (crystallinity) has important effects on its physical properties. Sulfur, while usually polycrystalline, may also occur in other allotropic forms with completely different properties. Although crystallites are referred to as grains, powder grains are different, as they can be composed of smaller polycrystalline grains themselves. Generally, polycrystals cannot be superheated; they will melt promptly once they are brought to a high enough temperature. This is because grain boundaries are amorphous, and serve as nucleation points for the liquid phase. By contrast, if no solid nucleus is present as a liquid cools, it tends to become supercooled. Since this is undesirable for mechanical materials, alloy designers often take steps against it (by grain refinement).
Material fractures can be either intergranular or a transgranular fracture. There is an ambiguity with powder grains: a powder grain can be made of several crystallites. Thus, the (powder) "grain size" found by laser granulometry can be different from the "grain size" (rather, crystallite size) found by X-ray diffraction (e.g. Scherrer method), by optical microscopy under polarised light, or by scanning electron microscopy (backscattered electrons).
If the individual crystallites are oriented completely at random, a large enough volume of polycrystalline material will be approximately isotropic. This property helps the simplifying assumptions of continuum mechanics to apply to real-world solids. However, most manufactured materials have some alignment to their crystallites, resulting in texture that must be taken into account for accurate predictions of their behavior and characteristics. When the crystallites are mostly ordered with a random spread of orientations, one has a mosaic crystal. Abnormal grain growth, where a small number of crystallites are significantly larger than the mean crystallite size, is commonly observed in diverse polycrystalline materials, and results in mechanical and optical properties that diverge from similar materials having a monodisperse crystallite size distribution with a similar mean crystallite size.
Coarse grained rocks are formed very slowly, while fine grained rocks are formed quickly, on geological time scales. If a rock forms very quickly, such as from the solidification of lava ejected from a volcano, there may be no crystals at all. This is how obsidian forms.
Grain boundaries
Grain boundaries are interfaces where crystals of different orientations meet. A grain boundary is a single-phase interface, with crystals on each side of the boundary being identical except in orientation. The term "crystallite boundary" is sometimes, though rarely, used. Grain boundary areas contain those atoms that have been perturbed from their original lattice sites, dislocations, and impurities that have migrated to the lower energy grain boundary.
Treating a grain boundary geometrically as an interface of a single crystal cut into two parts, one of which is rotated, we see that there are five variables required to define a grain boundary. The first two numbers come from the unit vector that specifies a rotation axis. The third number designates the angle of rotation of the grain. The final two numbers specify the plane of the grain boundary (or a unit vector that is normal to this plane).
Grain boundaries disrupt the motion of dislocations through a material. Dislocation propagation is impeded because of the stress field of the grain boundary defect region and the lack of slip planes and slip directions and overall alignment across the boundaries. Reducing grain size is therefore a common way to improve strength, often without any sacrifice in toughness because the smaller grains create more obstacles per unit area of slip plane. This crystallite size-strength relationship is given by the Hall–Petch relationship. The high interfacial energy and relatively weak bonding in grain boundaries makes them preferred sites for the onset of corrosion and for the precipitation of new phases from the solid.
Grain boundary migration plays an important role in many of the mechanisms of creep. Grain boundary migration occurs when a shear stress acts on the grain boundary plane and causes the grains to slide. This means that fine-grained materials actually have a poor resistance to creep relative to coarser grains, especially at high temperatures, because smaller grains contain more atoms in grain boundary sites. Grain boundaries also cause deformation in that they are sources and sinks of point defects. Voids in a material tend to gather in a grain boundary, and if this happens to a critical extent, the material could fracture.
During grain boundary migration, the rate determining step depends on the angle between two adjacent grains. In a small angle dislocation boundary, the migration rate depends on vacancy diffusion between dislocations. In a high angle dislocation boundary, this depends on the atom transport by single atom jumps from the shrinking to the growing grains.
Grain boundaries are generally only a few nanometers wide. In common materials, crystallites are large enough that grain boundaries account for a small fraction of the material. However, very small grain sizes are achievable. In nanocrystalline solids, grain boundaries become a significant volume fraction of the material, with profound effects on such properties as diffusion and plasticity. In the limit of small crystallites, as the volume fraction of grain boundaries approaches 100%, the material ceases to have any crystalline character, and thus becomes an amorphous solid.
Grain boundaries are also present in magnetic domains in magnetic materials. A computer hard disk, for example, is made of a hard ferromagnetic material that contains regions of atoms whose magnetic moments can be realigned by an inductive head. The magnetization varies from region to region, and the misalignment between these regions forms boundaries that are key to data storage. The inductive head measures the orientation of the magnetic moments of these domain regions and reads out either a “1” or “0”. These bits are the data being read. Grain size is important in this technology because it limits the number of bits that can fit on one hard disk. The smaller the grain sizes, the more data that can be stored.
Because of the dangers of grain boundaries in certain materials such as superalloy turbine blades, great technological leaps were made to minimize as much as possible the effect of grain boundaries in the blades. The result was directional solidification processing in which grain boundaries were eliminated by producing columnar grain structures aligned parallel to the axis of the blade, since this is usually the direction of maximum tensile stress felt by a blade during its rotation in an airplane. The resulting turbine blades consisted of a single grain, improving reliability.

In materials science and related fields, crystallographic texture is the distribution of crystallographic orientations of a polycrystalline sample. A sample in which these orientations are fully random or is amorphous and thus no crystallographic planes, is said to have no texture. If the crystallographic orientations are not random, but have some preferred orientation, then the sample may have a weak, moderate or strong texture. The degree is dependent on the percentage of crystals having the preferred orientation.
Texture is seen in almost all engineered materials, and can have a great influence on materials properties. The texture forms in materials during thermo-mechanical processes, for example during production processes e.g. rolling. Consequently, the rolling process is often followed by a heat treatment to reduce the amount of unwanted texture. Controlling the production process in combination with the characterization of texture and the material's microstructure help to determine the materials properties, i.e. the processing-microstructure-texture-property relationship. Also, geologic rocks show texture due to their thermo-mechanic history of formation processes.
One extreme case is a complete lack of texture: a solid with perfectly random crystallite orientation will have isotropic properties at length scales sufficiently larger than the size of the crystallites. The opposite extreme is a perfect single crystal, which likely has anisotropic properties by geometric necessity.
Characterization and representation
Texture can be determined by various methods. Some methods allow a quantitative analysis of the texture, while others are only qualitative. Among the quantitative techniques, the most widely used is X-ray diffraction using texture goniometers, followed by the electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) method in scanning electron microscopes. Qualitative analysis can be done by Laue photography, simple X-ray diffraction or with a polarized microscope. Neutron and synchrotron high-energy X-ray diffraction are suitable for determining textures of bulk materials and in situ analysis, whereas laboratory X-ray diffraction instruments are more appropriate for analyzing textures of thin films.
Texture is often represented using a pole figure, in which a specified crystallographic axis (or pole) from each of a representative number of crystallites is plotted in a stereographic projection, along with directions relevant to the material's processing history. These directions define the so-called sample reference frame and are, because the investigation of textures started from the cold working of metals, usually referred to as the rolling direction RD, the transverse direction TD and the normal direction ND. For drawn metal wires the cylindrical fiber axis turned out as the sample direction around which preferred orientation is typically observed (see below).
Common textures
There are several textures that are commonly found in processed (cubic) materials. They are named either by the scientist that discovered them, or by the material they are most found in. These are given in Miller indices for simplification purposes.
Cube component: (001)[100]
Brass component: (110)[-112]
Copper component: (112)[11-1]
S component: (123)[63-4]
Orientation distribution function
The full 3D representation of crystallographic texture is given by the orientation distribution function (ODF) which can be achieved through evaluation of a set of pole figures or diffraction patterns. Subsequently, all pole figures can be derived from the ODF.
The ODF is defined as the volume fraction of grains with a certain orientation
g
{\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {g}}}
.
ODF
(
g
)
1
V
d
V
(
g
)
d
g
.
{\displaystyle {\text{ODF}}({\boldsymbol {g}})={\frac {1}{V}}{\frac {dV({\boldsymbol {g}})}{dg}}.}
The orientation
g
{\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {g}}}
is normally identified using three Euler angles. The Euler angles then describe the transition from the sample's reference frame into the crystallographic reference frame of each individual grain of the polycrystal. One thus ends up with a large set of different Euler angles, the distribution of which is described by the ODF.
The orientation distribution function, ODF, cannot be measured directly by any technique. Traditionally both X-ray diffraction and EBSD may collect pole figures. Different methodologies exist to obtain the ODF from the pole figures or data in general. They can be classified based on how they represent the ODF. Some represent the ODF as a function, sum of functions or expand it in a series of harmonic functions. Others, known as discrete methods, divide the ODF space in cells and focus on determining the value of the ODF in each cell.
Origins
In wire and fiber, all crystals tend to have nearly identical orientation in the axial direction, but nearly random radial orientation. The most familiar exceptions to this rule are fiberglass, which has no crystal structure, and carbon fiber, in which the crystalline anisotropy is so great that a good-quality filament will be a distorted single crystal with approximately cylindrical symmetry (often compared to a jelly roll). Single-crystal fibers are also not uncommon.
The making of metal sheet often involves compression in one direction and, in efficient rolling operations, tension in another, which can orient crystallites in both axes by a process known as grain flow. However, cold work destroys much of the crystalline order, and the new crystallites that arise with annealing usually have a different texture. Control of texture is extremely important in the making of silicon steel sheet for transformer cores (to reduce magnetic hysteresis) and of aluminium cans (since deep drawing requires extreme and relatively uniform plasticity).
Texture in ceramics usually arises because the crystallites in a slurry have shapes that depend on crystalline orientation, often needle- or plate-shaped. These particles align themselves as water leaves the slurry, or as clay is formed.
Casting or other fluid-to-solid transitions (i.e., thin-film deposition) produce textured solids when there is enough time and activation energy for atoms to find places in existing crystals, rather than condensing as an amorphous solid or starting new crystals of random orientation. Some facets of a crystal (often the close-packed planes) grow more rapidly than others, and the crystallites for which one of these planes faces in the direction of growth will usually out-compete crystals in other orientations. In the extreme, only one crystal will survive after a certain length: this is exploited in the Czochralski process (unless a seed crystal is used) and in the casting of turbine blades and other creep-sensitive parts.
Texture and materials properties
Material properties such as strength, chemical reactivity, stress corrosion cracking resistance, weldability, deformation behavior, resistance to radiation damage, and magnetic susceptibility can be highly dependent on the material's texture and related changes in microstructure. In many materials, properties are texture-specific, and development of unfavorable textures when the material is fabricated or in use can create weaknesses that can initiate or exacerbate failures. Parts can fail to perform due to unfavorable textures in their component materials. Failures can correlate with the crystalline textures formed during fabrication or use of that component. Consequently, consideration of textures that are present in and that could form in engineered components while in use can be a critical when making decisions about the selection of some materials and methods employed to manufacture parts with those materials. When parts fail during use or abuse, understanding the textures that occur within those parts can be crucial to meaningful interpretation of failure analysis data.
Thin film textures
As the result of substrate effects producing preferred crystallite orientations, pronounced textures tend to occur in thin films. Modern technological devices to a large extent rely on polycrystalline thin films with thicknesses in the nanometer and micrometer ranges. This holds, for instance, for all microelectronic and most optoelectronic systems or sensoric and superconducting layers. Most thin film textures may be categorized as one of two different types: (1) for so-called fiber textures the orientation of a certain lattice plane is preferentially parallel to the substrate plane; (2) in biaxial textures the in-plane orientation of crystallites also tend to align with respect to the sample. The latter phenomenon is accordingly observed in nearly epitaxial growth processes, where certain crystallographic axes of crystals in the layer tend to align along a particular crystallographic orientation of the (single-crystal) substrate.
Tailoring the texture on demand has become an important task in thin film technology. In the case of oxide compounds intended for transparent conducting films or surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices, for instance, the polar axis should be aligned along the substrate normal. Another example is given by cables from high-temperature superconductors that are being developed as oxide multilayer systems deposited on metallic ribbons. The adjustment of the biaxial texture in YBa2Cu3O7−δ layers turned out as the decisive prerequisite for achieving sufficiently large critical currents.
The degree of texture is often subjected to an evolution during thin film growth and the most pronounced textures are only obtained after the layer has achieved a certain thickness. Thin film growers thus require information about the texture profile or the texture gradient in order to optimize the deposition process. The determination of texture gradients by x-ray scattering, however, is not straightforward, because different depths of a specimen contribute to the signal. Techniques that allow for the adequate deconvolution of diffraction intensity were developed only recently.

Cupstones, also called anvil stones and nutting stones, are
lithic artifacts having a roughly discoidal surface resulting from human action. The hemispherical indentation itself is an important element of paleoart, known as a "cupule". Cup and ring marks are also common in the Fertile Crescent and India, and later in the Mediterranean, Atlantic, and Alpine regions of Europe, sometimes associated with complex petroglyphs or megalithic monuments.
Etymology
One encyclopedia of archaeology treats "pitted stone", "cupstones", and "nutting stones" as synonyms and says that they "may have been formed by cracking nutshells, though this activity lacks adequate confirmation through ethnographic examples or published experimentation."
Purpose
These objects have received little study, perhaps because edged tools and weapons have more intrinsic interest to private collectors, but closer study of them might reveal something of domestic practices and toolmaking technology. There is no agreement upon their purpose or purposes, which may have included the processing of food, medicine or pigments, storage, arrow-production or fire-drilling. As such, they could represent a primitive form of mortar and pestle. The age of these man-made structures is difficult to ascertain, but generally they are believed to have been produced in the Bronze Age and Upper Paleolithic although some, for example in North America and Europe, were generated at a later date.
Visually, they may resemble omarolluks, a naturally occurring feature of sedimentary rock occurring exclusively in the Belcher Islands, an archipelago accounting for 0.25% of Hudson Bay, whence they are thought to have been spread by glaciers.
Distribution
Similar objects can be found on all continents except Antarctica. They are associated with Celtic Europe, prehistoric Australia, Borneo and the Middle East. Some of the earliest cupules can be found at the Bhimbetka cave site in India, dating to 290,000-700,000 BCE, but in Europe they do not pre-date the most recent cold phase (the Würm glaciation or Weichselian glaciation). Some scholars insist the items are "false" artifacts, that is, their form results from natural processes rather than human activity. However, no one has yet described processes that might both produce such effects and also explain the distribution of the effects and the objects. Certainly air-bubbles in stone, broken open and eroded, could produce some of these phenomena. The objects are familiar in Illinois, Ohio, Indiana, Arkansas, Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama and Mississippi, and occur elsewhere as well.
The pattern, size and number of concavities is not predictable, nor is material—impressions are found in soft sandstone and hard granite. Cupstones may exhibit a mixture of large and small indentations, perhaps indicating multiple uses over a considerable span of time. Indentations range from barely visible 1/16" to 6". Examination under magnification suggests the impressions were at least in some cases formed by rotary grinding, particularly in softer rocks. In most cases, archeological evidence of cupstones on hard rock surfaces and monoliths indicates that they were created by direct percussion with rock hammers. Typical impressions are of the simple pit type, though some cavities have been excavated to produce an opened-sphere type of pocket, by means and for reasons unknown. Very large specimens weighing several tons and with dozens of impressions several inches across are thought to be cult objects; they have been found throughout the Mississippi Valley.
Historic accounts
There are several ethnographic accounts of the Native use of nutting stones in the historic times. One account says "the Virginia Indians in 1587 tells us that each household had stones for cracking nuts and for grinding shell and other materials." It goes on to say that "This statement would doubtless be equally true if applied at that time to almost any tribe inhabiting the section east of the Mississippi."
In Hawaii, cup and ring marks are associated with petroglyphs, and those occurring in the boundary regions of Apuki and Puna lands have been used as depositories for a child's navel cord, a custom also observed in other Polynesian peoples.
Interpretation
Early observers saw the processing of mast using stones, and one later recreation achieved similar results: nuts were placed, one at a time, on stone (an "anvil" stone) and then struck with a smaller "hammer" stone: "As nuts were cracked in this manner a pit developed in the lower stone; the pit deepened as additional nuts were cracked, and this facilitated the cracking process since nuts were held rather stationary in this 'seat.'"
The most likely interpretation seems that these artifacts represent a single technique of shaping or adapting stone for multiple purposes, some unguessed (for instance, the function of the smallest pits) and that the objects could be used by single or multiple individuals over long periods of time, and for various purposes. Indeed, the apparent randomness of their distribution may indicate that they were left lying as modified natural resources, whether with benevolent intent or because they did not represent a sufficient investment of time and labor to justify transporting them ("opportunistic" tools). More simply, perhaps the users intended to return to the same area during the next year's mast-gathering period.
The now traditional term "nutting stone" may be justified, as may "straightening stone" or "shaft-anchor" (for straightening arrow-shafts) within a larger class we might call "poculoliths" (<L. poculus, "small pocket", "cup"). While an equivalent to "pitted stone", the proposed term has the advantage of wider comprehensibility among international scholars as the worldwide distribution of the form becomes increasingly evident.
Another interpretation of these structures is fossilization. Anatomical structures of the orbit, skull, joints, organs, antler and dental cavities are similar. Fragmentation may have occurred before or after fossilization, natural human smoothing and polishing. The structure becomes a ubiquitous, multipurpose tool for humans to exploit.
Cupstone sites in Northern Italy, Switzerland and the Atlantic regions, also known as "druid altars" or "Opferkessel" (sacrificial bowl), are associated with places of worship due their locality close to glacial erratics, view points and treacherous alpine trails. Some of the prehistoric cupstone sites north of the Alps along the Jura mountains, for example near Grenchen, show a row of cups with possibly astronomical orientation. However, cupstones are usually not associated with calendar functions as this is sometimes the case with menhirs and megaliths.
Omars
Nutting stones can be very similar in appearance to omars. Omars are naturally formed stones that have hemispherical voids in them.

A dado rail, also known as a chair rail or surbase, is a type of moulding fixed horizontally to the wall around the perimeter of a room. The dado rail is traditionally part of the dado or wainscot and, although the purpose of the dado is mainly aesthetic, the dado rail may provide the wall with protection from furniture and other contact.
In cities such as Bath, England, the dado rail has been used in architecture to imply parts of the classical order. According to author Micahel Forsyth, "The dado, including skirting and dado rail, represents the pedestal, the wall surface the column shaft, and the cornice the entablature."
Modern trends have been towards 36 inches (910 mm), based on the assumption that its purpose is to protect the wall from chair backs. The term chair rail is also used for this reason.
Dado rails are also sometimes applied to a wall without the full dado treatment. The purpose of the rail in these cases may be protective, and it is common in environments where walls are subject to much wear and tear, such as shopping centres and hospitals. In such cases the height of the rail is often 1,200 mm (47 in) or even 1,500 mm (59 in) from the floor and serves a functional rather than aesthetic role.
The dado rail is a decorative and functional architectural element that is designed to divide the wall into distinct sections and protect it from furniture or other potential sources of wear and tear. It can be used for colour blocking, additional definition and to pay homage to the original architectural details of the property.
Materials and Construction
Dado rails are produced using a variety of materials, each offering unique benefits depending on the intended aesthetic and functional requirements:
Wood: Traditional dado rails are crafted from solid hardwoods such as oak, pine, or mahogany. These materials are highly durable and lend a timeless appearance, making them particularly suitable for restoration projects and period properties.
Medium-Density Fibreboard (MDF): MDF is a cost-effective and widely used material for dado rails in modern interiors. It is easy to cut, resistant to warping, and can be painted to suit a variety of décor styles.
Plaster: In historical buildings, plaster dado rails are often molded directly onto walls, blending seamlessly with other decorative architectural features such as cornices and friezes.
PVC or Plastic: Commonly used in commercial spaces or high-traffic areas like hospitals and shopping centers, these materials are durable and low-maintenance, prioritizing function over aesthetics.
Height and Installation
The placement of a dado rail is significant for achieving both aesthetic balance and functional utility. Traditionally, dado rails are installed at a height of 900 millimetres (35 in) to 1,200 millimetres (47 in) (35 to 47 inches) above the floor, aligning with the historical purpose of protecting walls from chair backs. However, modern applications may vary depending on the room's proportions and design preferences.
One method for determining the ideal height involves dividing the total wall height by five and doubling the result. For instance:
A wall height of 2,400 millimetres (94 in) divided by five equals 480 millimetres (19 in). Doubling this value places the dado rail at approximately 960 millimetres (38 in) above the floor.
This calculation ensures visual harmony by dividing the wall into proportionate sections, dado rail manufacturers provide tools like dado rail height calculators that can assist in determining optimal placement.
Dado rails may also be installed without the full dado or wainscot treatment, serving a purely decorative purpose or providing wall protection in areas subject to frequent wear and tear. For example, in high-traffic spaces like hallways or dining rooms, the material and height can be adjusted to match the room's style and functional needs.

A dado set or dado blade is a type of circular saw blade, typically used with a table saw or radial arm saw, which is used to cut dadoes or grooves in woodworking. There are two common kinds of dado sets, stacked dado set and wobble blade.
Stacked dado set consists of two circular saw blades fixed on either side of a set of removable chippers. As the dado set spins, the two outside blades cut the dado walls and the chippers remove the waste material in between and smooth the bottom of the dado. The chippers are added or removed to the set as required to make a dado of the desired width. Chippers can also be interspersed with spacers to finely adjust the dado width. Consequently, changing the dado width requires the complete removal of the dado blade set from the arbor. After disassembly, chippers and/or spacers are used to achieve the desired width of the dado set.
Wobble blade or wobble dado or adjustable dado consists of a circular blade mounted on an adjustable multi-piece hub, that varies the angle of the blade to the arbor shaft. The width of the dado cut increases as the angle gets further from the radial normal (90°) to the arbor. While it is possible to adjust the thickness of the cut when the saw is mounted on the arbor, accurate adjustment is usually difficult because tightening the arbor nut often changes the adjustment. Also, because of their inherent geometry, wobble blades can only produce a flat-bottomed dado at one width setting, which may be a disadvantage in certain joinery operations. Another disadvantage of a wobble dado over stacked dado is undesirable vibrations. The magnitude of these vibrations varies with the blade's angular offset. In other words, the wider the dado, the stronger the vibrations. Dado cuts are also less likely to wear down over time, given that they are primarily designed to hold an inserted workpiece entirely still.

The Darkhan Metallurgical Plant (DMP; Mongolian: Дарханы Төмөрлөгийн Үйлдвэр) is a metallurgy plant in Darkhan, Darkhan-Uul Province, Mongolia.
History
The construction of the plant started in 1990. The plant then came into operation in 1994. The plant will achieve its full operation and production capacity by 2028.
Production
The plant acquires the raw iron ore from the nearby Tumurtolgoi Iron Ore Mine in Khongor District. It produces 100,000 tons of steel products and 2.5 million tons of iron ore concentrate annually.

David Webb (born 26 April 1935) is an English filmmaker, caver and conservationist. He has produced over a dozen films about caving and mine exploration (mostly in the Derbyshire region) and has contributed articles to Descent magazine.
Early and personal life
Originally from Grimsby, Webb graduated in pharmacy and remained in pharmacy management up until his retirement. In 1958, he was called up for national service in charge of medical stores and dispensary at a hospital in Malaysia during the Malayan Emergency. Webb later moved to Nottingham with his family in 1963.
Films
Webb's films have been presented to outdoor enthusiasts and made available in museums, caving shops and visitor centres across Derbyshire. Extracts from his films have been televised on programmes such as The One Show and Countryfile. He has been a regular feature at the Hidden Earth caving conference.
Webb is particularly known for his film Fight For Life: The Neil Moss Story about the death of Neil Moss in Peak Cavern in 1959. The film is notable for its detailed account of the rescue attempt and interviews with individuals who were present at the rescue operation.
His film To Titan From The Top documented a three-year dig by Dave 'Moose" Nixon and team as they attempted to excavate a direct path from above to the deepest cave in Britain: Titan near Castleton, Peak District.
After inheriting the 1968 film Underground Journey on 16mm, Webb undertook its digitisation and subsequent DVD production which includes an interview with expedition leader Doug Nash.
Webb was commissioned by the Ecton Hill Field Studies Association to produce a film of the Ecton Mines as a record of this historic site.
Conservation work
As Conservation Officer for the Derbyshire Caving Association (DCA) he played an integral role in setting up the Site of Special Scientific Interest Monitoring Scheme for Natural England which audited the special features of 67 caves in the Peak District. This led to it being the first region in the U.K. to complete the monitoring of cave SSIs, for which Webb and the DCA received an award.
With the help of volunteer cavers, Webb oversaw the removal of accumulated waste at various cave sites throughout the county, rendering them to an 'acceptable condition' after years of neglect.
As well as implementing the Cave Conservation Monitoring Scheme, he also coordinated regular meetings of landowners, caving instructors and representatives from organisations such as the National Trust, English Heritage, Bat Conservation Trust and Natural England.
Awards
In 2000, the Film and Video Institute awarded Webb the title LACI for his standard of filmmaking.
In 2012, Webb won the prestigious Giles Barker Award in recognition of excellence in his work in cave videography for over 20 years.
Filmography A-Z
Bagshawe Resurgence: A Source of Potential
Darfar Ridge Cave: A Conservation Project
Ecton Stone Quarry Mine
Fight For Life: The Neil Moss Story
Goodluck Mine: A Living Legacy
A Guided Tour of Temple Mine
Hidden Hydraulics: Sir Francis Level
Mow Cop: Tunnels and Tramways
Mud & Water
Overton Mine: A Mine and its Miners
Tearsall Pipe Caverns
The High Rake Lead Mine Dig: Reclaiming a Legacy
The Hollow Hill: The Story of the Ecton Mines
To Titan From The Top
Underground Journey
When Streams Run Dry: P8 in Drought
White River Series: A Conservation Audit
Wild Majorca (Sun, Sea and Stalagmites / Torrente De Pareis)

In archaeology, debitage is all the material produced during the process of lithic reduction – the production of stone tools and weapons by knapping stone. This assemblage may include the different kinds of lithic flakes and lithic blades, but most often refers to the shatter and production debris, and production rejects.
Debitage analysis
Debitage analysis, a sub-field of lithic analysis, considers the entire lithic waste assemblage. The analysis is undertaken by investigating differing patterns of debris morphology, size, and shape, among other things. This allows researchers to make more accurate assumptions regarding the purpose of the lithic reduction. Quarrying activities, core reduction, biface creation, tool manufacture, and retooling are believed to leave significantly different debitage assemblages. Lithic manufacture from a quarried source, or from found cobbles also leave different signatures. Some claim that they can determine the sort of tools used to create the debitage. Others feel it is possible to effectively estimate the work-hours represented, or the skill of the workers based on the nature of the debitage.
Debitage analysis of biface reduction can be used to determine what stage of reduction is represented in waste. Stahle and Dunn (1982) found that, as waste flake size decreases from initial to final stages in biface production, systematic changes in flake size can be used to identify stages of reduction in anonymous debitage samples through comparison with experimental assemblages. Use of Weibull distributions and least square analysis helped Stahle and Dunn confirm that this method can be used backward to estimate reduction stages of particular debitage frequencies. Other studies comparing the debitage of bifacial reduction during different stages has not yielded such positive results. Patterson (1990) was unable to distinguish between the stages of initial edging and secondary thinning using statistical analysis of 14 experimental assemblages.
The typological approach groups together lithics with similar manufacturing histories in order to emphasize patterns of manufacturing behavior (as in Sheets 1975). To use Sheets’ (1983:200) example, macroblades and prismatic blades were separated on the basis of their manufacture, in that the former was removed by percussion, while the latter was removed by a pressure technique. Casual, informal tools from unstandardized cores should be given scrutiny equal to that of formal tools from standardized core reduction.
The presence of cortex needs to be noted for all tool categories in all materials. The presence of cortex indicates the importation of an unworked nodule, with the first flakes both preparing the core by shaping and removing the roughened exterior of the cortex (Sheets 1978:9). The percentage frequency of cortex is an important statistic to help identify lithic production areas. A low incidence of cortex would indicate quarry preforming (cortex removed at the quarry, not at the site).
One specific type of debitage analysis is mass analysis. Mass analysis is based on analyzing debitage populations based on their size distribution across specified size grades. Ahler (1989) conducted an experimental replication under some technological settings and classified debitage into five groups according to their size, Discriminant analysis (by SPSS DISCRIMINANT function) was applied to compare mass analysis data sets for these five experimental data groups. He then compared the counts and weights of experimental samples with debris from two prehistoric workshop sites in western North Dakota. The result shows the experimental data sets can explain the technological composition of archaeological samples. Samples from several other sites also are applied this method and derive clear discriminant results. Especially in a specific function site, such as Legacy site a Late Woodland age camp in the Missouri breaks, associated with bison kill/butchering, the low frequency of cortex and a specific flake ratio (G4:Gl-3 ) data indicate that a soft hammer small flake tool production, which is similar with experiment result. Although this process has been used in many studies, Andrefsky warns of the potential problems associated with the many assumptions made while employing this analysis. One in particular that he draws attention to is the possibility of differences in debitage populations based on individual variation of the artifact maker; in his example, three different knappers all using bipolar core reduction have different percentages of size grade 3 debitage (5.2%, 13.2%, and 10.2%). These differences indicate that individual variation can be influential in the size distribution of debitage and should be kept in mind if mass analysis is being employed. The reason for which Andrefsky believes mass analysis have become so popular is due to the process's ease of use and speed. Andrefsky even quotes Ahler that between individual specimen analysis and mass analysis, mass analysis has the advantage because of four reasons: 1) biases are eliminated because mass analysis looks at the entire assemblage; both completed and fractured. 2) Because mass analysis doesn't require looking at each artifact, it is very rapid and efficient. 3) debitage biases based on the sample's size are reduced since it merely captures different specimen sizes. 4) the method is highly objective and can be learned by virtually anyone.
In addition, various attributes can be used for statistical and numerical methods which are currently used for debitage analysis. The attributes divides in the two ways, metric and non-metric. In the metric attributes, length, mid width, max width, platform length, platform width, bulb thickness, other point of thickness, platform angle and weight are included. And for the non-metric attributes, platform configuration, platform facet count, % dorsal cortex, dorsal scar count, remained portion, and size grade can be chosen. Bradbury and Carr specifically point to the continuum model to analyze flakes and these listed variables to try to determine which flake debris were caused by different actions (core reduction, tool making, etc.)
Sullivan and Rozen (1985) introduced a method of classifying debitage into four categories: complete flakes, broken (proximal) flakes, flake fragments (medial-distal flakes), and fragments that are unable to be oriented. Some success has been shown in using this classification to differentiate between different reduction strategies. Using discriminant analysis and Sullivan and Rozen's system to classify debitage, Austin (1997) was able to correctly distinguish between patterned tool and core reduction techniques for 93.33% of his experimental assemblages. Austin also tested how this typology would operate with mixed assemblages. He found that in an assemblage where there is a mixture of debitage from a patterned tool and core reduction, it is likely to be classified as a patterned tool assemblage, if the core debitage represents 50% or less of the total assemblage. Austin pointed out many factors that could change the characteristics of debitage (post-depositional processes, differences in raw material, etc.) and suggested that his method should be used in a preliminary fashion.
Refitting
Debitage refitting is a process whereby the collected assemblages of debitage are painstakingly put back together, like pieces in a puzzle. This can sometimes indicate the nature of the tools being produced, although missing pieces are a significant problem. More often, debitage refitting is used to learn how rocks were moved during the lithic manufacture process. This can sometimes indicate work areas, division of labor, or trade routes.
Sourcing
Debitage sourcing looks at the physical properties of the worked stone in an attempt to determine where on the earth it was obtained. This may require sophisticated equipment, and destructive testing, but even a visual inspection can provide a general idea. Sourcing is assumed to provide information about trade, or travel routes.
Dating
Some debitage material has been examined in an effort to obtain dates. Since debitage is plentiful, and individual specimens are usually not diagnostic, they can often undergo destructive analysis that would not be suitable for other artifacts. Results have been promising, but not spectacular. Obsidian and cryptocrystalline silicates appear to be the most promising materials for destructive analysis.
Obsidian, as a natural glass material, is peculiar because when it is exposed to water, the surface develops a patinated layer of hydrated perlite. Old fractures therefore have thicker layers of patina than more recent flake scars. As the rate of hydration is determined by factors such as moisture content, temperature, and the chemical composition of the obsidian, this method cannot provide absolute dates. However, this method has the major advantage of relying on obsidian flaking as the activating cause in this dating scheme.
Cryptocrystalline silicates, such as flint and chert, are sometimes heat-treated in order to improve the flaking properties of the material. This heating can be used as a zeroing point, and the date since the material was last heated can be established through fission track counts, thermoluminescence, or, in some rare cases, paleomagnetism. These provide absolute dates. Unfortunately, not all such tool stones were heat-treated, and not all heat-treatment is due to human agency. Forest fires are one way that stones can be heat-treated without human action.

Deep sea mining is the extraction of minerals from the seabed of the deep sea. The main ores of commercial interest are polymetallic nodules, which are found at depths of 4–6 km (2.5–3.7 mi) primarily on the abyssal plain. The Clarion–Clipperton zone (CCZ) alone contains over 21 billion metric tons of these nodules, with minerals such as copper, nickel, cobalt and manganese making up roughly 30% of their weight. It is estimated that the global ocean floor holds more than 120 million tons of cobalt, five times the amount found in terrestrial reserves.
Studies have shown that midwater mining techniques causing plumes can trigger bottom-up ecosystems impacts with severe consequences to marine life, extending beyond the initial mining area.
As of July 2024, only exploratory licenses have been issued, with no commercial-scale deep sea mining operations yet. The International Seabed Authority (ISA) regulates all mineral-related activities in international waters and has granted 31 exploration licenses so far: 19 for polymetallic nodules, mostly in the CCZ; 7 for polymetallic sulphides in mid-ocean ridges; and 5 for cobalt-rich crusts in the Western Pacific Ocean. There is a push for deep sea mining to commence by 2025, when regulations by the ISA are expected to be completed.
In April 2025, U.S. President Trump signed an Executive Order instructing the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to expedite permits for companies to mine in both international and U.S. territorial waters, citing the Deep Seabed Hard Minerals Resource Act of 1980.
Deep sea mining is being considered in the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of countries, such as Norway, where in January 2024 the government announced its intention to allow companies to apply for exploration permits in 2025. In December 2024, Norway's plans to begin awarding exploration licenses were temporarily put on hold after the Socialist Left Party (SV) blocked the planned licensing round as part of negotiations over the government budget. In 2022, the Cook Islands Seabed Minerals Authority (SBMA) granted three exploration licenses for cobalt-rich polymetallic nodules within their EEZ. In 2025, it was announced that the Cook Islands had signed a deal with China focused on deep-sea mining. Papua New Guinea was the first country to approve a deep sea mining permit in state waters for the Solwara 1 project, despite three independent reviews highlighting significant gaps and flaws in the environmental impact statement.
The most common commercial model of deep sea mining proposed involves a caterpillar-track hydraulic collector and a riser lift system bringing the harvested ore to a production support vessel with dynamic positioning, and then depositing extra discharge down the water column below 2,000 meters. Related technologies include robotic mining machines, as surface ships, and offshore and onshore metal refineries. Though largely composed of nickel and manganese which are most widely used as key inputs into the steel industry, wind farms, solar energy, electric vehicles, and battery technologies use many of the deep-sea metals. Electric vehicle batteries are a key driver of the critical metals demand that incentivizes deep sea mining, as well as demands for the production of aerospace and defense technologies, and infrastructure.
The environmental impact of deep sea mining is controversial. Environmental advocacy groups such as Greenpeace and the Deep Sea Mining Campaign claimed that seabed mining has the potential to damage deep sea ecosystems and spread pollution from heavy metal-laden plumes. Critics have called for moratoria or permanent bans. Opposition campaigns enlisted the support of some industry figures, including firms reliant on the target metals. Individual countries like Norway, Cook Islands, India, Brazil and others with significant deposits within their exclusive economic zones (EEZ's) are exploring the subject. Additionally, studies have noted the loss of cultural or spiritual value for communities indigenous to the region that have yet to be addressed in international legal frameworks.
As of 2021, the majority of marine mining used dredging operations in far shallower depths of less than 200 m, where sand, silt and mud for construction purposes is abundant, along with mineral rich sands containing ilmenite and diamonds.
Deposit types
Deep sea ore deposits are classified into three main types: polymetallic nodules, polymetallic sulfide deposits, and cobalt-rich crusts.
Polymetallic nodules
Polymetallic nodules are found at depths of 4–6 km (2.5–3.7 mi) in all major oceans, though due to their metallic composition those in the Pacific Ocean are of greatest commercial interest. Nodules may also be found in shallow waters like the Baltic Sea and in freshwater lakes. They are the most readily minable type of deep sea ore. These nodules typically range in size from 4–14 cm (1.6–5.5 in) in diameter, though some can be as large as 15 cm (5.9 in).
Manganese and related hydroxides precipitate from ocean water or sediment-pore water around a nucleus, which may be a shark's tooth or a quartz grain, forming potato-shaped nodules some 4–14 cm (1.6–5.5 in) in diameter. They accrete at rates of 1–15 mm per million years. These nodules are rich in metals including rare earth elements, cobalt, nickel, copper, molybdenum, and yttrium.
The Clipperton fracture zone hosts the world's largest deposit nickel resource. These nodules sit on the seafloor and require no drilling or excavation. Nickel, cobalt, copper and manganese make up nearly 30% of the contents.
Polymetallic sulfides
Polymetallic or sulfide deposits form in active oceanic tectonic settings such as island arcs and back-arcs and mid ocean ridge environments. These deposits are associated with hydrothermal activity and hydrothermal vents at sea depths mostly between 1 and 4 km (0.62 and 2.5 mi) and therefore located in shallower waters to other marine mineral types like polymetallic nodules. These minerals are rich in copper, gold, lead, silver and others.
Polymetallic sulphides appear on seafloor massive sulfide deposits. They appear on and within the seafloor when mineralized water discharges from a hydrothermal vent. The ionic metals and sulfides in the hot, mineral-rich water precipitate upon contact with cold seawater. The stock area of the chimney structures of hydrothermal vents can be highly mineralized.
Cobalt-rich crusts
Cobalt-rich crusts (CRCs) form on sediment-free rock surfaces around oceanic seamounts, ocean plateaus, and other elevated features. The deposits are found at depths of 600–7,000 m (2,000–23,000 ft) and form 'carpets' of metal-rich layers about 30 cm (12 in) thick at the feature surface. Crusts are rich in a range of metals including cobalt, tellurium, nickel, copper, platinum, zirconium, tungsten, and rare earth elements. Temperature, depth and seawater sources shape how the formations grow.
Cobalt-rich formations exist in two categories depending on the depositional environment:
hydrogenetic cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts grow at 1–5 mm/Ma, but offer higher concentrations of critical metals.
hydrothermal crusts and encrustations precipitate quickly, near 1600–1800 mm/Ma, and grow in hydrothermal fluids at approximately 200 °C (392 °F)
Submarine seamount provinces are linked to hotspots and seafloor spreading and vary in depth. They show characteristic distributions. In the Western Pacific, a study conducted at <1500 m to 3500 m bsl reported that cobalt crusts concentrate on less than 20° slopes. The high-grade cobalt crust in the Western Pacific correlated with latitude and longitude, a region within 150°E–140°W and 30°S–30°N.
Diamonds are mined from the seabed by De Beers and others.
Deposit sites
Deep sea mining sites hold polymetallic nodules or surround active or extinct hydrothermal vents at about 3,000–6,500 meters (10,000–21,000 ft) depth. The vents create sulfide deposits, which collect metals such as silver, gold, copper, manganese, cobalt, and zinc. The deposits are mined using hydraulic pumps or bucket systems.
The largest deposits occur in the Clarion–Clipperton zone in the Pacific Ocean. It stretches over 4.5 million square kilometers of the Northern Pacific Ocean between Hawaii and Mexico. Scattered across the abyssal plain are trillions of polymetallic nodules, potato-sized rocklike deposits containing minerals such as manganese, nickel, copper, zinc, and cobalt.
The Cook Islands contains the world's fourth largest deposit in the South Penrhyn basin close to the Manihiki Plateau.
Though the nodule fields of greatest commercial interest are located in the eastern Pacific, polymetallic nodules are also found within the Mid-Atlantic Ridge system, around Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and Tonga, and the Peru Basin.
Cobalt-rich crusts are found on seamounts in the Atlantic and Indian Ocean, as well as countries such as the Pacific Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, and Kiribati.
On November 10, 2020, the Chinese submersible Striver reached the bottom of the Mariana Trench 10,909 meters (35,790 feet). Chief designer Ye Cong said the seabed was abundant with resources and a "treasure map" can be made.
Promising sulfide deposits (an average of 26 parts per million) were found in the Central and Eastern Manus Basin around Papua New Guinea and the crater of Conical Seamount to the east. It offers relatively shallow water depth of 1050 m, along with a nearby gold refinery.
United States
A 2023 study identified four regions in US territorial waters where deep sea mining would be possible: the Hawaiian Islands, the southeastern Blake Plateau, California, and the Gulf of Alaska. Hawaii has both nodules and CRCs, while the other sites hold CRCs. Each area features distinct risks. Mining Hawaii could generate plumes that could damage important fisheries and other marine life. California's waters host massive ship traffic and communication cables. Alaska waters are rich in bottom-dwelling commercially valuable sea life.
In April 2025, U.S. President Trump signed an Executive Order instructing the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to expedite permits for companies to mine in both international and U.S. territorial waters, citing the Deep Seabed Hard Minerals Resource Act of 1980. This would allow mining of the deep seabed for the first time in the country.
Deep sea mining projects
Hakurei
The world's first large-scale mining of hydrothermal vent mineral deposits was carried out by Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC) from August to September 2017, using the research vessel Hakurei, at the 'Izena hole/cauldron' vent field within the hydrothermally active back-arc Okinawa Trough, which contains 15 confirmed vent fields according to the InterRidge Vents Database.
Solwara 1
The Solwara 1 Project was the first time a legitimate legal contract and framework had been developed on deep sea mining. The project was based off the coast of Papua New Guinea (PNG), near New Ireland province. The project was a joint venture between Papua New Guinea and Nautilus Minerals Inc. Nautilus Minerals held a 70% stake and Papua New Guinea purchased a 30% stake in 2011. PNG's economy relies upon the mining industry, which produces around 30–35% of GDP. Nautilus Minerals is a Canadian deep-sea mining company. The project was approved in January 2011, by PNG's Minister for Mining, John Pundari. The company leased a portion of the seabed in the Bismarck Sea. The lease licensed access to 59 square kilometers. Nautilus was allowed to mine to a depth of 1,600 meters for a period of 20 years. The company then began the process of gathering the materials and raising money for the project. The intent was to mine a high grade copper-gold resource from a weakly active hydrothermal vent. The target was 1.3 tons of materials, consisting of 80,000 tons of high-grade copper and 150,000 to 200,000 ounces of gold sulfide ore, over 3 years. The project was to operate at 1600 mbsl using remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROV) technology developed by UK-based Soil Machine Dynamics.
Community and environmental activists launched the Deep Sea Mining Campaign and Alliance of Solwara Warriors, comprising 20 communities in the Bismarck and Solomon Seas who attempted to ban seabed mining. Their campaign against the Solwara 1 project lasted for 9 years. Their efforts led the Australian government to ban seabed mining in the Northern Territory. In June 2019, the Alliance of Solwara Warriors wrote the PNG government calling for them to cancel all deep sea mining licenses and ban seabed mining in national waters. They claimed that PNG had no need for seabed mining due to its abundant fisheries, productive agricultural lands, and marine life. They claimed that seabed mining benefited only a small number of already wealthy people, but not local communities and Indigenous populations. Others chose to engage in more artistic forms, such as Joy Enomoto. She created a series of woodcut prints titled Nautilus the Protector. The activist community argued that authorities had not adequately addressed free, prior and informed consent for affected communities and violated the precautionary principle.
In December 2017 the company had difficulties in raising money and eventually could no longer pay what it owed to the Chinese shipyard where the "production support vessel" was docked. Nautilus lost access to the ship and equipment. In August 2019, the company filed for bankruptcy, delisted from the Toronto Stock Exchange, and was liquidated. PNG lost over $120 million dollars. Nautilus was purchased by Deep Sea Mining Finance LTD. PNG has yet to cancel the extraction license contract.
Shell
In the 1970s Shell, Rio Tinto (Kennecott) and Sumitomo conducted pilot test work, recovering over ten thousand tons of nodules in the CCZ.
Licenses
Licences for mineral exploration in the area beyond national jurisdiction registered with the International Seabed Authority (ISA) are mostly located in the CCZ. As of June 2025, the ISA has entered into 17 contracts with private companies and national governments for polymetallic nodules in the CCZ, one contract with the Government of India in the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB), and one contract with Chinese contractor Beijing Pioneer Hi-Tech Development Corporation in the Prime Crust Zone (PCZ) in the Western Pacific.
Cook Islands
In 2019, the Cook Islands passed two deep sea mining laws. The Sea Bed Minerals (SBM) Act of 2019 was to enable "the effective and responsible management of the seabed minerals of the Cook Islands in a way that also...seeks to maximize the benefits of seabed minerals for present and future generations of Cook Islanders." The Sea Bed Minerals (Exploration) Regulations Act and the Sea Bed Minerals Amendment Act were enacted in 2020 and 2021, respectively.
In February 2022, the Cook Islands government Seabed Minerals Agency (SBMA) announced the award of three five-year licences exploration activities in Cook Islands EEZ to private companies Moana Minerals Limited, the Cook Islands Consortium (CIC), and Cook Islands Investment Corporation - Seabed Resources (CIIC-SR).
Moana Minerals is a subsidiary of Ocean Minerals LLC (OML), a US-based private investment firm led by President and CEO Hans Smit. Hans Smit previously led Neptune Minerals, Inc a DSM company interested in SMS exploitation in Papua New-Guinean waters. He also served as managing director of Royal IHC MMP, focused on underwater mining activities, and worked on underwater mining systems used for subsea diamond mining.
In 2023, the SBMA announced the results of a technical report on the polymetallic nodule deposit of the Cook Islands' exclusive economic zone, undertaken on its behalf by RSC Mining and Mineral Exploration. The study was based on the analysis of both historical samples from previous scientific cruises, as well as data from recent work undertaken by SBMA PMN exploration contractors CIIC-SR and Moana. RSC produced a JORC Code (2012)-compliant Mineral Resource Statement for parts of the EEZ totalling 6.7 billion tons of polymetallic nodules (wet), grading 0.44% Co, 0.21% Cu, 17.4% Fe, 15.8% Mn, and 0.37% Ni. Of this total resource, 304 million tons of nodules grading 0.5% Co, 0.15% Cu, 18.5% Fe, 15.4% Mn, and 0.25% Ni, are assessed at Indicated Resource, whereas Inferred Resources account for 6.4 billion tons grading 0.4% Co, 0.2% Cu, 17% Fe, 16% Mn, and 0.4% Ni.
In 2025, the Cook Islands announced that it had signed a five-year agreement with China focussed on exploration and research into seabed minerals.
The Metals Company (TMC)
In 2011, the Republic of Nauru sponsored an ISA exploration contract with exploration activities carried out by Nauruan company, Nauru Ocean Resources Inc (NORI). NORI is a wholly owned subsidiary of Canadian company, The Metals Company. Since then, The Metals Company has conducted 22 offshore research campaigns on the NORI exploration area as part of its Environmental and Social Impact Assessment. On June 29, 2021, the Republic of Nauru invoked the 'Two-Year Notice' provision of the 1994 Implementation Agreement requiring the ISA to finalize and adopt a Mining Code within two years. This two year deadline elapsed on July 9, 2023, meaning that The Metals Company and other contractors can submit an application for commercial exploitation at any time.
The Metals Company also controls two further ISA exploration licences in the CCZ through Kiribati-based Marawa Research and Exploration Ltd., and through its Tongan subsidiary Tonga Offshore Mining Limited (TOML), which it acquired from Deep Sea Mining Finance Limited in April 2020.
In April 2025, following U.S. President Donald Trump's Executive Order on offshore mining, The Metals Company submitted applications for a commercial recovery permit and two exploration licenses under the Deep Seabed Hard Mineral Resources Act and regulations set by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The commercial recovery permit covers 25,160 square kilometers while the two exploration licence applications cover a combined 199,895 square kilometers.
Norway
In January 2024 Norway's parliament allowed multiple companies to begin submitting applications to prospect for DSM resources, mainly Seafloor Massive Sulfides (SMS), but also potentially Cobalt-rich crusts in the Norwegian EEZ, as well as on its continental shelf extension, along Mohns and Knipovich ridges Jan Mayen and Svalbard in the North Atlantic.
Norway's Institute of Marine Research recommended five to ten years of research before allowing mining. In late April 2024, the Norwegian Offshore Directorate invited interested parties to nominate blocks in this area for a first round of mineral exploration licences. First licence awards are expected for early 2025.
Three Norwegian start-up companies, Loke Marine Minerals, Green Minerals, and Adepth Minerals were expected to apply for licenses. In March 2023 Loke acquired Lockheed Martin subsidiary UK Seabed Resources Limited (UKSRL). This saw UKSRL's two PMN exploration licences in the CCZ, as well as its 19.9% stake in Ocean Minerals Singapore (OMS), an ISA contractor for PMNs in the CCZ. OMS is majority-controlled by Singaporean state-owned Keppel Offshore & Marine, now part of also Singaporean state-owned Seatrium.
Green Minerals is another Norwegian company which has expressed interested in mining seafloor massive sulfide (SMS) deposits in the Norwegian EEZ. In January 2023, Green Minerals signed a memorandum of understanding with the ISA to obtain an exploration licence for PMNs in the CCZ. In its May 2024 Capital Markets Day Presentation, it confirmed its ambitions to commence mining operations on SMS deposits on the Norwegian continental shelf and EEZ by 2028, as well as explore for PMNs in the CCZ in the future.
After in April 2024, the Norwegian government opened up an exploration area in the Norwegian and Greenland Seas, the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) declared that it would take legal action against the decision. According to the government, the seabed contains many resources including copper, zinc and cobalt, which are necessary for producing mobile phones, wind turbines, computers and batteries but as for now supplies are controlled by China or "authoritarian countries". In June the energy ministry submitted "a proposal to announce the first licensing round on the Norwegian continental shelf for public consultation." According to the government, the aim is to understand if a sustainable deep sea mining there can occur. Otherwise, "deep-sea mining would not be permitted".
Extraction methods
Robotics and AI technologies used to selectively harvest nodules while minimizing disturbances to the deep sea environment are under development.
Remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) are used to collect mineral samples from prospective sites, using drills and other cutting tools. A mining ship or station collects the deposits for processing.
The continuous-line bucket system (CLB) is an older approach. It operates like a conveyor-belt, running from the bottom to the surface where a ship or mining platform extracts the minerals, and returns the tailings to the ocean.
Hydraulic suction mining instead lowers a pipe to the seafloor and pumps nodules up to the ship. Another pipe returns the tailings to the mining site.
Borehole Mining is used for mining of natural resources from below the seafloor.
Process
The three stages of deep-sea mining are prospecting, exploration and exploitation. Prospecting entails searching for minerals and estimating their size, shape and value. Exploration analyses the resources, testing potential recovery and potential economic/environmental extraction impacts. Exploitation is the recovery of these resources.
Resource assessment and pilot mining are part of exploration. If successful, "resources" attain a "reserves" classification. Bottom scanning and sampling use technologies such as echo-sounders, side scan sonars, deep-towed photography, remotely operated vehicles, and autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV).
Extraction involves gathering material (mining), vertical transport, storing, offloading, transport, and metallurgical processing.
Polymetallic minerals require special treatment. Issues include spatial tailing discharges, sediment plumes, disturbance to the benthic environment, and analysis of regions affected by seafloor machines.
Environmental impacts
Deep sea mining has significant environmental impacts. Research on deep-sea polymetallic nodule mining has substantially increased in recent years, but the expected level of environmental impact is still being established. Scientists from MIT examined seafloor sediment plumes generated by a prototype mining collector in the Clarion Clipperton Zone and found that the plume forms a low-lying turbidity current which hugs the seafloor. Another MIT-led study found that modelling can reliably predict plume behaviour in the midwater column, and impact is influenced by the quantity of discharged sediment, and the turbulence of the water upon discharge.
Meta-analysis of 11 separate disturbance and test mining studies showed that impacts are often severe immediately after mining, with major negative changes in density and diversity of most groups occurring. Almost all studies show some recovery in faunal density and diversity for meiofauna and mobile megafauna, often within one year. However, very few faunal groups return to baseline or control conditions after two decades. Benchmark Mineral Intelligence, commissioned by The Metals Company, conducted a life cycle assessment of the environmental impact of producing critical minerals from polymetallic nodules in the Clarion-Clipperton Zone (CCZ). The study found that the deep-sea model performed better environmentally than traditional land-based methods, showing 54-70% lower Global Warming Potential (GWP) on average, due to renewable energy use, high metal recovery, and efficient processes. Another study in the Journal of Cleaner Production found that the production of 1 billion electric vehicles using nodules would produce 90% less CO2 equivalent than producing the same amount of vehicles through land-based mining. While some environmental consequences (such as sediment plumes, disturbance of the bottom, and toxic effects) are known, the scientific understanding of deep sea ecosystems is currently insufficient to evaluate all possible impacts.
Technology is under development to mitigate these issues. This includes selective pick-up technology that leaves alone nodules that contain life and leaves behind some nodules to maintain the habitat.
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) emphasizes the need for a comprehensive assessment of the environmental impacts of deep-sea mining, which targets polymetallic nodules at depths of 3–6.5 km (1.9–4.0 mi), polymetallic sulphides at 1–4 km (0.62–2.5 mi), and cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts between <400 m and 3.5 km. Researchers and governments have raised significant concerns about the potential impacts on unique and fragile ecosystems, with only 24.9% of the deep seabed mapped. These ecosystems are essential for ocean and carbon cycling and are vulnerable to climate change. There are widespread calls for a moratorium on deep-sea mining until its environmental, social, and economic risks are fully investigated. The International Seabed Authority (ISA) aims to finalize exploitation regulations by 2025, and a new agreement under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on marine biodiversity was adopted on 19 June 2023.
Sediment plumes
Plumes are caused when seawater and sediment separated from nodules at the surface are is returned to the ocean, increasing water turbidity (cloudiness).
Plumes differ significantly from traditional mining tailings, as deep-sea sediment primarily consists of naturally occurring, unprocessed material rather than chemically altered waste.
Plumes form wherever the sediments are released, typically either near the bottom or near the surface. Releasing sediment closer to the surface is cheaper, but allows it to disperse more widely.
When settling on the seafloor, sediments can bury or suffocate animals. Sediments raining down from above can also harm mid-water swimmers such as jellyfish, sea butterflies, and commercially fished animals.
Depending on particle size, water currents, and mining technology, surface plumes can spread widely.
Fine particles (small and light) can remain suspended in the water column for extended periods and spread over large areas if released near the surface.
In shallow water, sediment can resuspend following storms, starting another cycle of damage. In-situ studies show most seafloor sediment settles rapidly, with 90% depositing within 2 km and the vast majority within 9 km, even under extreme conditions, while heavy sediment blanketing remains confined to a small area near the source.
Benthic disturbance
Disturbing or, in the case of seafloor massive sulfides and cobalt crusts, removing parts of the sea floor impacts the habitat of benthic organisms, albeit to varying degrees.
A study analyzing data from 11 experimental mining simulations found that deep-sea mining activities cause immediate declines in faunal density and diversity, with mobile and small-sized fauna recovering more quickly. Some ecosystems fail to return to pre-disturbance levels after 26 years, while some faunal groups partially rebound, particularly meiofauna and mobile megafauna. Due to limited testing, comparable assessments for seafloor massive sulfides (SMS) and cobalt-rich crusts remain limited.
Nodule fields provide hard substrate on the bottom, attracting macrofauna. A study of benthic communities in the CCZ assessed a 350 square mile area with an ROV. They reported that the area contained a diverse abyssal plain megafaunal community. Megafauna (species longer than 20 mm (0.79 in)) included glass sponges, anemones, eyeless fish, sea stars, psychropotes, amphipods, and isopods. Macrofauna (species longer than 0.5mm) were reported to have high species diversity, numbering 80 -100 per square meter. The highest species diversity was found among polymetallic nodules. In a follow-up survey in areas with potential for seabed mining, researchers identified over 1,000 species, 90% previously unknown, with over 50% dependent on polymetallic nodules for survival.
Noise and light pollution
Deep sea mining generates ambient noise in normally quiet pelagic environments. However, planned operations will not use sonar and are not expected to make dangerously loud noises, with most noise highly localized and similar to that of typical marine shipping operations. Noise pollution affects deep sea fish species and marine mammals, though due to the low surface productivity of its surface waters the Clarion Clipperton Zone is unlikely to be a feeding or breeding site for large marine mammals. Impacts include behavior changes, communication difficulties, and temporary and permanent hearing damage.
Light pollution affects the environment of DSM sites as they are normally pitch dark. Mining efforts may increase light levels to illuminate the bottom. Shrimp found at hydrothermal vents suffered permanent retinal damage when exposed to submersible floodlights. Behavioral changes include vertical migration patterns, ability to communicate, and ability to detect prey.
Ecosystem
Polymetallic nodule fields are hotspots of abundance and diversity for abyssal fauna. Sediment can clog filter-feeding organisms such as manta rays. As they block the sun, they inhibit growth of photosynthesizing organisms, including coral and phytoplankton. Phytoplankton sit at the bottom of the food chain. Reducing phytoplankton reduces food availability for all other organisms. Metals carried by plumes can accumulate in tissues of shellfish. This bioaccumulation works its way through the food web, impacting predators, including humans. Deep-sea mining could impact species that lay eggs on the seabed, but it also poses respiratory risks from debris uprooted by mining.
A recent study claimed that nodules are also important for oxygen production in the absence of light and photosynthesis. Nodules the size of potatoes have shown to be able to produce an electric current that is almost equal to the voltage in an AA-sized battery. This generate electric currents strong enough to perform electrolysis, which splits water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen.
One report states that biomass loss stemming from deep sea mining is estimated to be significantly smaller than that from mining on land. One estimate of land ore mining reports that it will lead to a loss of 568 megatons of biomass (approximately the same as that of the entire human population) versus 42 megatons of biomass from DSM. In addition, land ore mining will lead to a loss of 47 trillion megafauna organisms, whereas deep-sea mining is expected to lead to a loss of 3 trillion.
Despite its remote and barren appearance, these portions of the seafloor are teeming with life. These are primarily invertebrates (worms, crustaceans, sea slugs, etc). In recent research referring to the Clarion-Clipperton Zone (CCZ), they find that these ancient stable ecosystems mean there is great diversity among the species. There are only 438 named species that have been scientifically recognized in the CCZ. There have been over 5,000 identified species that are "unnamed," meaning they are morphotypes or specimens registered as distinct but not formally named. There could be up to 8,000 unrecognized species in these zones. Due to data duplication in the International Seabed Authority, the true biodiversity of these zones is likely undercounted, which increases the danger of mining. Deep sea mining in these zones creates the possibility of irreversible damage to the entire ecosystems and species that remain undescribed and undocumented.
The CCZ biodiversity patterns largely consist of phylogenetic clustering and can create greater vulnerability to mining exploitations. Additionally, species in the area that are locally rare, consisting of small populations in limited distributions, which is when closely related species tend to co-occur. This means if a lineage is extinguished many related species could be vulnerable. Therefore, as a whole they are more vulnerable to extinction through disruption. This stresses the importance of increasing knowledge of the species and phylogenetic clustering with robust biodiversity baselines and assessments, including the structuring of communities. Filling in the knowledge gaps of the taxonomy could help the areas recover after deep sea mining causes damage, as well as create accurate assessments of the biodiversity before mining occurs.
This kind of estimation does not take into account the recoverability of the situation: how long does nature need to reclaim an abandoned site. By contrast, a different study reported that deep sea mining would be approximately 25 times worse for biodiversity than land mining.
The species at the seabed, including those around vents, are not well known. A lot of these species are microbes. These vents have a wide variety of species around them who are adapted to extreme conditions. Therefore, it is possible they are able to handle extreme habitat changes that could result from deep-sea mining, but the full effects are not known yet.
According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature: "Not only is deep-sea mining an energy-intensive industry with high greenhouse gas emissions, but disruption of the ocean floor, which is by far the largest carbon storage reservoir on Earth, can lead to reduced carbon sequestration as well as the release of large amounts of the potent greenhouse gas methane, exacerbating the climate crisis". However, according to the United States Geological Survey, no methane hydrates are known to exist in the Clarion Clipperton Zone where most deep-sea mining activity would take place. Also, a peer-reviewed study published in the Journal of Cleaner Production found that using nodules instead of land-ore mining can reduce CO2 emissions by 80% (Ni), 76% (Cu), 29% (Co), and 22% (Mn).
Dark Oxygen
A new insight into the complexity of the abyssal environment has been proposed by a team of researchers from the Scottish Society of Marine Sciences. They have found that rising oxygen concentrations in some experiments where manganese nodules were present, and suggest the nodules are producing oxygen. The manganese nodules were proposed to act as a kind of battery due to their composition with different metals, and release oxygen into the environment by electrolysis. The research has since been subject to criticism including data omission and methodological concerns. Researchers from the University of Gothenburg criticized the authors for "poor-quality lander incubation experiments, leading to faulty oxygen flux measurements" and as a result called for the paper to be retracted. An academic at the University of Tokyo also criticized the paper for providing no evidence for electrolysis at the seafloor and for its inconsistency with decades of prior research that failed to report oxygen production, warning in an article in Science that "there is a high probability that the paper is wrong". The rebuttals were synthesised into a peer-reviewed article, which states that polymetallic nodules were not present in some of the experiments that recorded rising oxygen, that the geobattery mechanism is not thermodynamically possible, and that the rising oxygen is likely experimental artefact. The authors involved in the original study have also backed away from the two key claims made in the original article - that the rising oxygen levels can be attributed to polymetallic nodules, and that this is due to the nodules acting like batteries.
Laws and regulations
Deep-sea mining is governed by the International Seabed Authority, an autonomous international organization, established by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to oversee and regulate all mineral resource-related activities in the seabed area beyond national jurisdiction.
Formation of the United Nations Convention Law of the Sea
The ocean was traditionally seen as an ungoverned space, reflected in the 17th-century principle of Mare Liberum, or the freedom of the sea, proposed by Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius. Grotius argued that seas were open to all states for navigation and trade, supporting Dutch maritime expansion. However, as technology advanced and human activity in the ocean grew, tensions over governance arose. This led to the competing framework of Mare Clausum, or the closed sea, proposed by English jurist John Selden in 1635. Mare Clausum advocated for coastal state sovereignty over adjacent waters, aligning with England's goals to control trade routes and fisheries.
The increasing complexity of maritime use and disputes between Mare Liberum and Mare Clausum highlighted the need for a comprehensive legal framework. Early efforts, including the United Nations Conferences on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS I in 1958 and UNCLOS II in 1960), failed due to disagreements over the balance between freedom of the seas and sovereign rights. These issues were addressed with the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) on December 10, 1982, providing a universally accepted framework. Amendments to the deep seabed provisions led to the 1994 Agreement and the Part XI Implementation Agreement, which entered into force on November 16, 1994, for ratifying states, aligning with the United Nations' role and Sustainable Development Goal 14.
UNCLOS, comprising over 400 articles and nine annexes, is the most detailed codification of maritime law ever undertaken by states under the UN. Driven by complex historical debates and evolving uses of the sea, the Convention represents a compromise between freedom and territorial control. Adopted after nine years of negotiations, it was celebrated as a milestone in international law, despite challenges over provisions related to reaching a collective consensus over the seabed and areas beyond national jurisdiction.
UNCLOS created three new key institutions, playing distinct yet interrelated roles, ensuring effective governance. First, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), functioning as an independent judicial body with the authority to resolve disputes arising from the interpretation or application of the convention.
Second, is the International Seabed Authority (ISA), an autonomous international organization that oversees and regulates all mineral resource-related activities in the seabed area beyond national jurisdiction (ISA), with a "mandate to ensure the effective protection of the marine environment from harmful effects that may arise from deep-seabed-related activities."
Third, is the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS), playing a technical and advisory role, particularly in delineating the outer limits of a state's continental shelf.
Fourth, the Meeting of States Parties (MSP), or the Meeting of States Parties to the Law of the Sea Convention (SPLOS). Convened in accordance with Article 319, paragraph 2(e) of UNCLOS (1982), the MSP serves as a forum for member states to discuss and coordinate the implementation of the convention. It holds significant administrative functions, including the election of ITLOS, and CLCS members.
Legal territorialization of water zones
The 20th century saw significant challenges to the free sea order, particularly regarding claims over maritime resources. In 1945, the Truman Doctrine set a precedent by asserting U.S. jurisdiction over the continental shelf's natural resources, . This was followed by the 1952 Santiago Declaration, where Chile, Ecuador, and Peru claimed full sovereignty over their seabed and subsoil up to 200 nautical miles, extending this sovereignty to the waters and airspace above. The wave of decolonization also led newly independent states to prioritize control over marine resources for economic development. These declarations influenced the 1982 Law of the Sea, particularly shaping the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf's extent. This development marked a shift towards a zonal approach in international maritime law, dividing ocean spaces into distinct jurisdictional zones governed by the principles of sovereignty and freedom.
Under UNCLOS, states have the right and obligation to regulate activities within their coastal waters and continental shelf, structured spatially by legal zoning as follows: The Territorial Sea, extends up to 12 nautical miles from the baseline, where states can regulate laws and resources, with foreign ships granted innocent passage, including warships; the Exclusive Economic Zone stretches up to 200 nautical miles, where the state holds exclusive rights over mineral and economic resources and must preserve the environment, though it cannot restrict foreign ships. The enclosure of the EEZ marked a shift from global commons to state-controlled waters for economic and security reasons; the Extended Continental Shelf, governed by complex criteria and negotiation, allows states to claim up to 350 nautical miles beyond their continental shelf. Articles 76 to 85 of UNCLOS Part VI emphasize the importance of the continental shelf's natural resources, excluding fisheries. Notably, the Area, where the Convention designates over 50 per cent of the seabed as international jurisdiction, recognizing it as the common heritage of humankind, which entails its non-appropriation by states or private entities, its use exclusively for peaceful purposes, and benefits shared equitably., Regarding Straits, Article 38 of UNCLOS ensures the right of international navigation, allowing continuous transit without coastal state interference, though states may regulate for safety and environmental protection. Additionally, the flag state holds jurisdiction over its registered ships, ensuring compliance with international laws.
The International Seabed Authority (ISA)
The International Seabed Authority (ISA) was established under Article 156 of UNCLOS 1982 as an autonomous intergovernmental organization. Following the adoption of the implementing Agreement on July 28, 1994, and its entry into force on November 16, 1994, the ISA held its inaugural meeting in Jamaica. It gained observer status at the United Nations in October 1996, confirming its recognition as a legal entity under international law.
Under Article 157 of UNCLOS and the Part XI implementing agreement, the ISA is tasked with organizing and controlling activities in the Area, designated as the common heritage of mankind under Article 140 (LOSC 1982, UN 1994). This role has grown in importance with increasing interest in marine mineral exploitation by states and private entities.
The ISA operates through three main organs: the Assembly, the council, and the Secretariat. All 168 States Parties to UNCLOS, including the EU, are members of the Assembly, which elects the Council and Secretary-General, holds the authority to approve or reject the council's proposals for seabed mining, and oversees the Authority's budget.
The United Nations Convention on the Law and the Sea is related to the implementation of part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law and the Sea. This established a legal and regulatory framework governing deep sea mining in areas by the location beyond the limits of the jurisdiction. This convention is considered one of the most successful multilateral treaties in history that governs a wide range of topics such as the limits of continental shelves to the right of the free navigation in water. Under this Convention, the exploration and exploitation of seabed minerals have to be carried out under a contract with the International Seabed Authority and its subject to its rules, regulations, and procedures.
The 36-member Council authorizes contracts for seabed exploration and exploitation and proposes governance regulations subject to the Assembly's approval. It also nominates the Secretary-General, who serves a four-year term as the chief administrative officer of the ISA, supervises staff, and ensures impartiality by refraining from mining-related financial interests.
Additional advisory bodies include the Legal and Technical Commission, which makes recommendations on mining rules, and the Finance Committee, which addresses budgetary matters. Members are nominated by states and serve in their personal capacities. The Enterprise, the Authority's commercial arm, is empowered to conduct mining operations, initially through joint ventures, to generate revenues for equitable distribution among developing nations.
However, critics, particularly environmental groups, argue that the ISA faces a conflict of interest as both regulator and potential operator through the Enterprise. The ISA has denied these allegations.
Extraction and exploitation contracts
Article 153(2) of UNCLOS stipulates that exploration and exploitation of seabed minerals in the Area must occur under a contract with the ISA, adhering to its rules, regulations, and procedures cf. Article 162(2)(b) (UN 1982). Part XI of the Convention and the 1994 Implementation Agreement provide detailed mechanisms for ISA's administration of these contracts, ensuring compliance with international standards.
Contracts are open to both public and private enterprises sponsored by an UNCLOS State Party, provided they meet technological and financial criteria. The Council must evaluate whether economic pressures to exploit deep-sea minerals align with the need to protect marine ecosystems and biodiversity.
Section 1(7) of the Annex to the 1994 Agreement requires contractors to complete preparatory work, including environmental baseline studies, impact assessments and other obligations, before exploitation. Applications must include an environmental impact assessment (EIA) and a program for oceanographic and environmental studies, with exploitation plans requiring detailed information. Revenues from deep-seabed mining are intended for equitable distribution for the benefit of mankind, emphasizing support for developing countries lacking resources to participate independently
. To assist in its work, the ISA commissioned Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2019 for a comparative study on various economic models to equitably share deep-sea resource revenues.
Since 1994, the ISA has authorized mining exploration contracts in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans, focusing on polymetallic nodules, polymetallic sulfides, and cobalt crusts found at depths of 400 to 7,000 meters. While regulations include environmental protection measures, scientists warn that mining these deposits risks irreparable harm to critical ecosystems, the ocean's carbon sink functions, and marine biodiversity.
State sponsorship
Under the ISA licensing framework, only specific entities are eligible to conduct deep seabed mining in the Area I. According to UNCLOS, such activities are restricted to States Parties or entities, state-owned or private, nationally affiliated with or effectively controlled by these states. Sponsorship by a State Party, as required by Article 153(2)(b), is mandatory. Furthermore, Annex III, Article 4(3). specifies that private corporations must secure sponsorship from their home state, and if another state exerts effective control, its sponsorship is also required.
A state or a collective number of states must secure sponsorship from the ISA to adopt the regulatory control approach to effective control in granting exploration contracts to private sector companies. To date, the ISA has adopted what is described as a regulator control in granting exploration contracts to private sector companies. In addition, the ISA has focused on the contractor company's location of incorporation, meaning that, in some cases, the text for effective control is whether the ISA has a registered company in the sponsoring state.
Sponsoring states' obligations cannot be fulfilled exclusively through financial and market tools. The required compliance enforcement and accountability mechanisms can only work in practice if there is a meaningful link between the State and the contractor, which is where the notion of 'effective control' comes into play.
To obtain approval, States or State-sponsored entities must submit a plan of work to the ISA, which, upon approval, becomes a binding contract. This framework allows private companies to collaborate with sponsoring states, leveraging their technological resources cf. Article 162(2)(b) while operating under ISA's regulatory oversight.
The sponsorship requirement ensures entities comply with UNCLOS obligations, as highlighted by ITLOS, binding non-state actors to international and domestic legal responsibilities, cf. Annex III, Article 4(4), and Article 139 in the convention. Sponsorship also reinforces state accountability, ensuring non-state actors operate under domestic legal systems.
Non-parties to UNCLOS and non-state actors associated with such states are excluded from deep seabed mining activities. This exclusion underscores UNCLOS's role as the prevailing legal framework for regulating seabed resource activities, with alternative regimes likely deemed inconsistent with international law.
The Two-Year Rule
UNCLOS, as amended by the 1994 Implementing Agreement, provides the legal framework for regulating activities in the Area and tasks the ISA with developing and enforcing rules, regulations, and procedures for exploring and exploiting mineral resources.
A contentious provision within UNCLOS, referred to as the two-year rule, established in Section 1(15) of the Annex to the 1994 Implementation Agreement, permits any Member State of ISA, who's national intends to submit a plan of work for exploitation, to request the ISA Council to complete and adopt the necessary regulatory framework within two years. If the Council fails to finalize the exploitation regulations within the prescribed period, it is nonetheless required to "consider" and "provisionally approve" the submitted application, even in the absence of a fully developed regulatory structure, cf. Section 1(15)(c) of the Annex to the 1994 Agreement on Implementation. As further prescribed in Article 162(2)(o)(ii), UNCLOS though requires the ISA Council to adopt and temporarily apply rules, regulations, and procedures for activities like prospecting, exploration, and exploitation in the seabed area. These temporary rules must then be reviewed and approved by the Assembly, as outlined in Article 160(2)(e)(ii).
The council's decisions on these regulations must be reached by consensus, meaning no formal objections can be raised. Unlike most Council decisions, this rule, while ensuring broad agreement, enables any single objection to block progress, potentially leading to deadlock. In such cases, the council is required to pursue dispute resolution, including compulsory conciliation. This requirement for consensus is crucial, hence without agreed-upon regulations, the council is not authorized to evaluate applications for exploration or exploitation, effectively stalling activities in the Area.
Section 1(15) offers a pathway to circumvent such deadlocks, particularly when a small group of members obstructs progress. However, this mechanism is less effective when legitimate concerns exist about the adequacy of the regulatory framework, which may require more time to ensure a precautionary and thorough approach to resource exploitation.
Republic of Nauru
In June 2021, the Republic of Nauru partnered with The Metals Company to extract deep-sea minerals, driven by the need for renewable energy to support its energy sector. While deep sea mining could provide vital resources, its extraction requires significant energy and capital, and may cause environmental and social impacts on the island. Although it offers some relief, deep sea mining alone is unlikely to meet long-term demand.
By July 2023, Nauru's two-year rule expired, yet UNCLOS ensures that extraction beyond national jurisdiction should benefit developing states, This highlights the ongoing tension and key ocean paradigms, underpinning the discussing discourse between resource access, ocean health and equitable distribution, compounded by the challenges of crafting universally binding agreements under competing interests.
Since Nauru's application in 2021, the ISA has not established a clear legal process for mining, despite efforts since 2016 to create a Mining Code. The ISA aims to adopt a new code by 2025, which will offer a stronger regulatory framework, but concerns remain about legal gaps until then. Critics argue for a precautionary morato-rium or ban, with support from over 900 experts, but experts note that issuing mining licenses is complicated until the Mining Code is finalized.
Environmental Justice in Deep-Sea Mining Governance
Within deep-sea mining policies, environmental justice involves ensuring that decision-making processes, benefits, and costs are equally distributed or accessible among both current and future generations. Environmental justice in deep-sea mining is closely tied to human rights. Unequal distribution of environmental harms and benefits can undermine internationally recognized rights to health, food security, and participation in decision-making. Marginalized groups, including small island developing states and Indigenous peoples, are disproportionately affected when marine ecosystems are degraded. Integrating human rights principles into ocean governance frameworks emphasizes that environmental protection is not only an ecological concern but also a matter of fundamental human rights. This illustrates the need for transparent procedures, inclusive participation, and equitable benefit-sharing to ensure that deep-sea mining policies respect both environmental justice and human rights obligations.
Deep sea mining policies can perpetuate environmental injustice by giving financial benefits to small groups of mining operators while the public must take on the environmental burdens. Historically, negotiations surrounding deep sea mining policies have overlooked environmental impacts and overestimated economic benefits. This increases inequities in environmental burdens and undermines international environmental commitments. States that support deep sea mining despite its environmental risks create a potential for liability and legal challenges. The focus on economic exploitation over environmental protection and the exclusion of affected communities from decision-making processes contribute to the environmental injustice in deep sea mining. Deep-sea mining also threatens human rights due to overlooked human rights obligations in public participation at the International Seabed Authority. Enhancing public participation and independent review is necessary to protect human rights and the marine environment.
Moratorium debate
Background
In June 2021, the Pacific island nation of Nauru notified the ISA of its intent to sponsor a mining application by The Metals Company, triggering a provision in UNCLOS known as the "two-year rule". This provision required the ISA to either complete regulations for exploitation within two years or consider mining applications under existing rules. The deadline passed in July 2023 without finalised regulations, and as of late 2025, the Mining Code remains incomplete.
The two-year rule created urgency in what had been a slow-moving regulatory process, sparking intense debate about whether commercial mining should proceed before comprehensive environmental safeguards are in place. Since then, a growing number of countries, scientists, and companies have called for a moratorium or precautionary pause.
Legal arguments
Supporters of a moratorium argue it is consistent with UNCLOS and may even be legally required. Article 145 of UNCLOS requires states to protect the marine environment from harmful effects of seabed activities. Article 140 requires that activities in the Area be carried out for the benefit of humanity as a whole. Legal scholars have argued that if these obligations cannot currently be met due to insufficient scientific knowledge or regulatory capacity, a pause is necessary.
A 2023 legal opinion commissioned by The Pew Charitable Trusts concluded that deferring deep seabed mining is required by international law, citing three reasons: the current lack of science on deep-sea ecosystems, the absence of completed regulations, and the ISA's limited institutional capacity. The opinion stated that "a moratorium or precautionary pause is not only consistent with UNCLOS, but is actually required by it."
Critics have also noted that public participation in ISA decision-making remains weak, with some scholars arguing that effective participation is a legal precondition for legitimate governance, not merely a voluntary option.
Opponents counter that UNCLOS explicitly permits exploitation applications even without finalised regulations. The 1994 Implementation Agreement allows the ISA to consider and provisionally approve plans of work for exploitation. Some legal commentators argue the precautionary principle is not binding customary international law and cannot override the Convention's clear terms.
Countries calling for a moratorium
As of December 2025, approximately 40 countries have called for a moratorium, precautionary pause, or ban on deep seabed mining. These include Pacific Island nations like Palau, Fiji, Samoa, and the Marshall Islands, as well as European countries including France, Germany, the UK, Finland, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, and Sweden. In 2022, Palau's President Surangel Whipps Jr. launched an Alliance for a Deep-Sea Mining Moratorium at the UN Ocean Conference in Lisbon.
Norway initially moved toward opening its Arctic waters for mining after parliament approved exploration in January 2024. However, following sustained pressure from environmental groups and budget negotiations, Norway halted all licensing until at least 2029 and cut public funding for seabed mineral mapping. UN experts praised the decision as aligning with the precautionary principle and states' obligations under international law.
U.S. position and The Metals Company
The United States has not ratified UNCLOS and is not a member of the ISA. In April 2025, President Trump signed an executive order directing federal agencies to expedite permits for deep seabed mining under the Deep Seabed Hard Mineral Resources Act of 1980 (DSHMRA), a U.S. law predating the ISA.
Days later, The Metals Company, a Canadian mining firm, submitted applications to NOAA for exploration licenses and a commercial recovery permit covering over 25,000 square kilometres in the Clarion-Clipperton Zone. The ISA responded that it remains the only legal authority to regulate mineral activities in international waters and that bypassing its framework would violate international law. France's ocean minister called the plan "environmental piracy", and China's foreign ministry stated that deep sea mining must comply with UNCLOS.
Scientific concerns
Over 940 marine scientists and policy experts from more than 70 countries have signed a statement calling for a pause on deep seabed mining. They argue that scientific knowledge of deep-sea ecosystems remains insufficient to assess or mitigate environmental impacts. Environmental management approaches such as regional planning and adaptive monitoring exist but remain incomplete without clear thresholds for defining "serious harm" to the marine environment.
A 2023 study found that over 90% of species observed in the Clarion-Clipperton Zone are undescribed by science. Research published in 2025 examined the aftermath of a 2022 mining test in the Pacific. Scientists found that animal numbers dropped 37% and species diversity declined 32% in areas disturbed by mining equipment. A separate study of a 1970s test site showed that biological impacts persisted four decades later, though some organisms had begun to recolonise.
Corporate and financial positions
Over 65 companies and financial institutions have endorsed a moratorium on deep seabed mining. In 2021, BMW, Volvo, Samsung SDI, and Google pledged not to source minerals from the seabed and to exclude such materials from their supply chains. Other companies making similar commitments include Renault, Volkswagen, Rivian, Apple, Microsoft, Salesforce, and Philips.
A group of 40 financial institutions representing over €3.8 trillion in assets has urged governments not to proceed with deep seabed mining. The European Investment Bank has classified deep-sea mineral extraction as environmentally unacceptable.
Arguments for and against
The moratorium debate reflects competing narratives: proponents of mining frame it as necessary for decarbonization and mineral security, while opponents highlight epistemic uncertainty and argue that the deep sea should be left undisturbed.
Those supporting a moratorium argue that: scientific knowledge is insufficient to assess environmental risks; deep-sea ecosystems may take decades or centuries to recover from mining; metals can be obtained through recycling, improved efficiency, and responsible terrestrial mining; and the "common heritage of mankind" principle requires protecting the deep sea for future generations.
Opponents argue that: UNCLOS permits exploitation and a moratorium contradicts the treaty's terms; deep-sea minerals are needed for the clean energy transition; exploration provides essential scientific data; and contractors have legitimate expectations based on existing frameworks.
Current status
At its July 2025 session, the ISA completed a second reading of draft exploitation regulations but significant disagreements remain. No Mining Code was adopted and no deadline was set for completion. The Council agreed to launch an investigation into possible non-compliance following The Metals Company's U.S. application, sending a message that attempts to bypass the ISA would not be tolerated. Negotiations continue, with the next session scheduled for 2026.
Economic perspective
Deep-sea mining offers significant economic potential, driven by the growing demand for critical minerals needed for green technologies such as batteries, electric vehicles (EVs), and renewable energy systems. Estimates suggest that the global economic opportunity from seabed mining could reach $20 trillion. For instance, mining 75,000 square kilometers of the seabed could generate $21–$42 billion in gross metal value over two decades.
Since Deep-sea mining represents a transformative $20 trillion economic opportunity to support the global energy transition. To fully realize its potential, it is essential to address challenges including significant costs, environmental risks, and regulatory uncertainties. Achieving sustainability and inclusivity in this emerging industry will require strategic investments, robust international cooperation, and effective governance mechanisms.
Resource Abundance and Economic Efficiency
The economic viability of deep-sea mining is underpinned by the abundance of high-value resources. The Clarion-Clipperton Zone (CCZ) in the Pacific Ocean contains 3.4–5 times more cobalt and 1.8–3 times more nickel than global land-based reserves, making it a critical area for meeting future energy demands. These minerals are essential for producing low-carbon technologies, including EV batteries and renewable energy storage systems, as well as for producing steel which is widely used in infrastructure to support global development.
In addition to resource abundance, deep-sea mining benefits from high-grade deposits and lower operational costs compared to terrestrial mining due to reduced overburden removal. Optimizations such as reduced trench depth can cut mining time by 26% and increase deposit value by 53%. The process is also less carbon-intensive, offering both environmental and economic advantages. A study published in the Journal of Cleaner Production found that producing battery metals sufficient for the production of 1 billion electric vehicles using nodules will produce 90% less CO2 equivalent than producing the same amount of metals through land-based mining.
Economically, deep-sea mining has become more and more popular. Since deep-sea mining is used to get rare metals, it has become a new way to manage the rising demand for these metals. Some ways that these metals are used are for laptops, phones, electronic cars, technology for renewable energy, and storage of electricity.
Strategic Importance in Global Markets
From an economic perspective, deep-sea mining offers a way to diversify global mineral supply chains and reduce dependence on terrestrial mining. Nations with access to seabed resources could gain a competitive edge in securing materials essential for modern technologies. Sustainable seabed mining could also alleviate the environmental impact of land-based extraction.
Opportunities for Developing Nations
Deep-sea mining presents a unique economic opportunity for developing nations, particularly small island states. Revenue from resource exploitation can provide much-needed funding for economic growth and development in vulnerable regions. The International Seabed Authority (ISA) emphasizes equitable profit sharing to ensure that economically disadvantaged nations benefit from deep-sea mining activities. This revenue could provide essential income for economically vulnerable island nations, helping to address global economic inequalities and foster inclusive economic growth.
Challenges to Economic Viability
Despite its promise, deep-sea mining faces economic challenges. High initial investments in technology and infrastructure, coupled with ongoing operational costs, pose barriers to entry for many nations and companies. The financial viability of mining operations depends on external factors such as global mineral prices and the availability of marine assets.Environmental impacts pose long-term economic risks. Habitat destruction and the disruption of ecosystem services, including carbon cycling and biodiversity, could result in costs exceeding $465 billion in lost natural capital. Critics argue that these risks may outweigh the immediate financial benefits of mining operations.
Regulatory Frameworks
To maximize its economic potential, deep-sea mining requires effective governance. The ISA's Mining Code aims to balance economic gains with environmental protection, ensuring sustainable and equitable practices. Without robust regulations, unchecked environmental degradation and inequitable profit distribution could undermine the sector's economic advantages.
Geopolitical aspects of deep sea mining
Academic research on deep-sea mining (DSM) has traditionally concentrated on technical feasibility, environmental impacts, and economic viability. In recent years, an increasing attention has been paid to the geopolitical and distributional dimensions of DSM. The body of literature examines questions of access to seabed resources, benefit-sharing mechanisms, Norwegian or Japanese deep-sea practices and politics, allocation of risks, and the roles of state and non-state actors in extraction, production, and distribution processes.
Several studies have reviewed DSM-related discourses from different perspectives, including discourse analysis, non-human and Anthropocene-oriented approaches, ethical, legal, and environmental justice frameworks, anthropological and ethnographic methodologies, and post-colonial critiques. Other contributions have emphasized interdisciplinarity as a defining feature of DSM research, integrating insights from biology, geology, anthropology, economics, political science, and international relations.
Within the literature, three interrelated challenges are commonly identified: (a) governance of areas beyond national jurisdiction under the "common heritage of mankind" principle; (b) strategic competition over critical minerals needed for the green transition; and (c) the distribution of benefits and burdens between developed and developing states, particularly small island developing states, as well as Indigenous and coastal communities. These challenges are typically analyzed through three overlapping thematic lenses: 1) geopolitics of control and access to seabed resources, 2) power relations, new frontiers, and the interplay with state actors and non-state actors; and 3) distributional and environmental concerns.
Geopolitics of deep-sea mining
A growing strand of the literature situates DSM within broader geopolitical dynamics. Scholars argue that DSM has strategic importance because it provides access to minerals such as nickel, cobalt, manganese, and rare earth elements that are critical for renewable energy technologies, batteries, electric vehicles, and wider green transition strategies. Global political developments, including China's Belt and Road Initiative and Russia's invasion of Ukraine, have intensified interest in the strategic implications of seabed resources.
DSM is often framed as part of a green response to defossilization, positioning deep-sea minerals as both an economic input and a geopolitical asset. From this perspective, states view seabed resources not only in terms of supply security but also as tools within broader geopolitical competition, particularly among major powers such as the United States and China, as well as allied states in the Indo-Pacific region. The literature highlights significant uncertainty and risk. Scholars identify technological barriers, environmental unknowns, and regulatory ambiguity as key contributors to both commercial and strategic risk, arguing for integrated approaches that combine innovation, sustainability, stakeholder engagement, and alignment with global sustainability goals. These risks include the possibility of stranded assets, regulatory backlash such as moratoria, and reputational damage.
Some analyses extend beyond state-centric perspectives to include corporate actors. The blue economy agenda has facilitated the expansion of a DSM commodity frontier by promoting regulatory environments favourable to corporate interests, particularly in the metals sector. This perspective suggests that the geopolitics of DSM involves interactions between states, international institutions, and private firms. Others scholars explore how deep-sea mining might be reconciled with sustainable development, and it is argued that its viability hinges on addressing five interdependent challenges: Technological readiness, environmental protection, economic feasibility, robust governance, and social acceptability. Progress requires parallel advancements across all domains.
Power relations, new frontiers and actors
The geopolitics literature on DSM examines power relations related to access, capacity, and dependency. Key questions include which states hold exploration contracts, which possess the technological and financial means to exploit seabed resources, and which may become dependent on external actors. DSM is often compared to terrestrial critical minerals geopolitics, with competition occurring both in areas beyond national jurisdiction and near EEZs of coastal and island states. In this sense, the "New Frontiers" of the deep sea are constructed as an undiscovered, unexplored, and resourceful area that can be overcomed, conquered and settled upon in order to exploit new findings of resources. The new frontiers of the deep sea is a geopolitical competition between states.
DSM is often understood and characterized as a new geopolitical frontier shaped by competing imaginaries of resource security, progress, environmental risk, and precaution. Many geopolitical accounts remain grounded in traditional interstate frameworks and insufficiently address the material and ecological specificities of the deep sea. By emphasizing resource temporalities, scholars suggest that DSM geopolitics is not only spatially complex but also shaped by long-term environmental and social time horizons. The temporal dimension is also highlighted in research on Indigenous and local communities. Scholars have tried to analyze how Pacific Island states and respective peoples of these areas have been central to struggles over defining and redefining deep-sea mineral deposits as exploitable resources, framing these processes as forms of ontological politics. Other scholars similarly argue that the concentration of deep-sea minerals in regions such as the Indian Ocean may intensify rivalries over oceanic territories.
Most academic studies of geopolitics have traditionally focused on states as the primary actors shaping international power relations and spatial strategies. A growing body of scholarship advocates for a broader conception of geopolitical agency that moves beyond state-centric frameworks. These scholars argue that geopolitics should account for a wider range of actors and interests operating within, across, and beyond state boundaries, including non-state actors such as multinational corporations, international organizations, social movements, and Indigenous communities, as well as non-human entities and material forces.
This expanded perspective emphasizes that geopolitical outcomes are not produced solely through formal state actions but also through complex interactions involving economic networks, technological systems, environmental processes, and ecological constraints. In particular, it aligns with calls for greater scholarly attention to ecological processes and environments, such as oceans, polar regions, and the deep sea, as active components of geopolitical dynamics rather than passive backdrops to human activity. These approaches highlight how environmental systems can shape political power, territorial claims, and resource governance, thereby contributing to a more inclusive and multidimensional understanding of geopolitics.
Distributional aspects of deep-sea mining
Distributional questions are a central concern in the DSM literature, focusing on how benefits and burdens are allocated among states, corporations, communities, and future generations. In this approach, four competing narratives of the DSM debates can be characterized: 1) a green economy in a blue world, 2) the sharing of DSM profits, 3) uncertainty surrounding deep-sea ecosystems, and 4) arguments for leaving minerals unexploited. These narratives reflect divergent views on who should benefit from DSM and whether such benefits can be equitably distributed.
Within a broader comparative framework of DSM that includes terrestrial and extraterrestrial resource extraction, scholars argue that competition for mineral wealth may exacerbate geopolitical tensions and reinforce sovereign dominance. It is warned that the potential for renewed conflict is driven by resource acquisition across land, sea, and space. A recurring concern is that states hosting deep-sea mineral resources — often developing countries or small island states — may lack the capacity to ensure equitable agreements or long-term benefits. This raises the possibility of a "resource curse" in the deep-sea context. In areas beyond national jurisdiction, the "common heritage of mankind" principle implies that benefits should accrue globally. Other scholars have tried to analyze how historical property rights regimes and contemporary distributional agendas may marginalize Indigenous cultural connections to the deep seabed, with implications for both present and future generations.
Distributional issues in DSM encompass questions concerning the allocation of environmental, social, and economic risks and benefits among different actors and regions. Deep-sea ecosystems remain among the least understood environments on Earth, and scientific research indicates that recovery from physical disturbance is extremely slow, with some impacts potentially irreversible on human timescales. Despite these uncertainties and risks, decision-making authority over DSM activities frequently resides with actors who may be geographically and socially distant from the affected environments, including states, international regulatory bodies, and private corporations. Scholars argue that this governance structure may result in the transfer of environmental burdens to the global commons or to communities with limited political influence, particularly in developing states or regions with constrained participation in international decision-making processes. Concerns have also been raised about asymmetries in knowledge production and access to scientific data, which can further reinforce unequal power relations in DSM governance.
In response, researchers emphasize the need for integrated approaches that address economic, environmental, social, and legal dimensions simultaneously, rather than treating them as separate policy domains. Such approaches seek to balance potential economic benefits with precautionary environmental management and social equity considerations. The focus of this scholarship is on how collective global society may benefit from safe and environmentally sound mining practices, while minimizing ecological harm and ensuring fair distribution of risks and benefits across present and future generations.
Environmental justice and regulation
The regulatory framework governing deep-sea mining (DSM), particularly in areas beyond national jurisdiction, is a major focus of the academic and policy literature. ISA, established under UNCLOS, is mandated to organize, regulate, and control mineral-related activities in the Area on behalf of humankind as a whole. Despite this responsibility, numerous studies emphasize that the ISA's so-called "mining code" remains incomplete, with exploitation regulations still unresolved after decades of negotiation. This prolonged regulatory uncertainty has raised concerns about the adequacy of environmental protection, transparency in decision-making, and the ability of existing institutions to manage irreversible ecological risks in the deep sea.
From an environmental justice perspective, the absence of finalized exploitation rules has significant distributional and procedural implications. Unclear regulations affect how benefits from DSM are to be shared, how environmental harm is prevented or remedied, and who bears responsibility and liability for damage to marine ecosystems. Scholars argue that weak or ambiguous standards may disproportionately disadvantage developing states and future generations, particularly if irreversible biodiversity loss occurs before robust safeguards are in place. The literature stresses the need for precautionary approaches and enforceable environmental thresholds that reflect not only scientific uncertainty but also ethical considerations regarding intergenerational equity.
Procedural justice is another central concern in discussions of DSM governance. Decision-making processes within the ISA have been criticized for limited transparency and uneven participation, especially for non-state actors, Indigenous groups, and civil society organizations that may be affected indirectly by mining activities. Several authors call for stronger incorporation of environmental justice principles into ocean governance debates, including meaningful stakeholder participation, access to information, and accountability mechanisms that extend beyond sponsoring states and contractors. Without such measures, DSM regulation risks reinforcing existing global inequalities in ocean governance.
Within EEZs, coastal states exercise greater control over DSM activities and may negotiate directly with mining companies. While this sovereignty allows states to tailor regulatory approaches to national priorities, the literature highlights substantial disparities in regulatory capacity, technical expertise, and bargaining power among coastal states. These disparities may result in inequitable contracts, limited environmental oversight, or inadequate revenue-sharing arrangements, particularly in small island developing states and least developed countries. As a result, environmental justice concerns within EEZs often intersect with broader issues of development, governance, and resource dependency.
In contrast, activities in the Area are legally required to be carried out for the benefit of humankind as a whole, with equitable sharing of financial and economic benefits as a core principle. Translating this principle into practice remains contested. The literature notes that global value-chain dynamics can significantly limit the developmental benefits accruing to sponsoring or resource-adjacent states. In particular, the location of refining, processing, and manufacturing facilities in industrialized countries means that much of the economic value generated by DSM may be captured outside host or sponsoring states. This raises questions about whether existing benefit-sharing mechanisms can meaningfully address structural inequalities in the global minerals economy.
The literature frames environmental justice as a critical lens through which to assess DSM regulation. Scholars argue that without clear rules, robust environmental protections, and equitable benefit-sharing arrangements, DSM governance risks privileging commercial and geopolitical interests over environmental integrity and social equity. As debates over exploitation regulations continue, environmental justice considerations are increasingly viewed as central to the legitimacy and sustainability of deep-sea mining governance.
Reasons for deep sea mining
With terrestrial supplies of critical minerals dwindling, countries are seeking to diversify and secure their share of deep-sea mineral resources. As highlighted by the ISA's role in regulating these resources, the demand for seabed mining is driven by several geopolitical factors, including the rise of green technologies, a growing reliance on electronics, and heightened geopolitical tensions, particularly in Europe. According to The U.S. Department of Defense, they set a new record for sales through the foreign military sales system with more than $80 billion in sales and grant assistance, with the main buyers being countries such as Sweden, Poland and the Netherlands.
As nations like the US, Japan, and Norway push for faster exploitation of deep-sea resources, the ISA's structure becomes increasingly critical, especially as countries seek to navigate the balance between economic development and environmental sustainability. The growing focus on energy security and the economic impact of sanctions, such as those imposed on Russia due to the ongoing conflict with Ukraine, further underscores the need for reliable, alternative resource supplies like deep-sea minerals.
Current state of the global mineral market
The global mineral market is currently dominated by China, which controls approximately 90% of the world's refined critical minerals. This dependency on China has raised concerns, particularly in the U.S., Australia, and Europe, who seek to reduce their reliance on Chinese resources. The global shift is influencing the governance model of the ISA, as countries look for more direct access to seabed minerals. By securing deep-sea mineral resources, states hope to disrupt China's monopoly and gain a stake in the emerging seabed mining market, potentially altering the geopolitical balance in mineral production and supply chains. Meanwhile, China is also trying to secure quick access to the rare materials on the deep seabed.
New dividing lines within traditional alliance blocs
As seabed mining becomes a more prominent issue, new geopolitical divides are emerging within traditional alliance blocs, including among NATO members. Countries like the US, Japan, and Norway are increasingly aligned in their support for faster seabed resource extraction, driven by their need for critical minerals for green technologies. In contrast, nations such as France and Germany, concerned with environmental protection, call for stronger regulatory frameworks and a more cautious approach to seabed mining. The ISA's role in this divide is critical, as it serves as the body that governs the exploration and exploitation of these resources. The debate within the ISA mirrors broader tensions between economic growth and environmental sustainability, with different nations pushing for contrasting agendas in the regulatory framework.
ISA's structural model and regulatory issues
The ISA's structural model is increasingly being tested by the growing demand for seabed mining resources. As countries rush to secure deep-sea minerals, the ISA's ability to manage these activities through its existing governance model is under scrutiny. Critics of the ISA point to the organization's reliance on granting exploration and exploitation licenses, which has raised concerns about the speed at which these licenses are being issued and whether adequate environmental safeguards are in place. This issue is highlighted by the differing agendas of member states, with some prioritizing economic development and others, like France and Germany, pushing for more stringent environmental regulations. As these challenges unfold, the ISA's ability to address both the economic and ecological aspects of deep-sea mining becomes a central issue in global resource governance.
Future trends and technologies
Demand and supply uncertainties
Deep-sea mining focuses on three primary sources of minerals: polymetallic nodules, The IEA (2022) projects that the clean energy sector will increasingly dominate the demand for metals like copper, nickel, cobalt, rare-earth elements, and lithium. This surge is expected to accelerate over the next two decades, with lithium demand growing particularly fast. This rising demand, alongside limited terrestrial resources, is fueling interest in deep-sea mining as a potential source of these critical materials.
The International Energy Agency (IEA, 2022) predicts that the clean energy sector will significantly increase its share of demand for critical raw materials (CRMs) in the coming decades. By 2040, demand for lithium is expected to grow more than 40 times, while demand for graphite, cobalt, and nickel will increase by 20-25 times. This growing demand raises concerns about the availability of CRMs, which are also vital to industries like information technology and defense. The European Commission continues to monitor supply risks for these materials (EC 2020c, 2023).
Potential recycling to meet demand
Future trends in deep-sea mining are increasingly linked to the potential for recycling critical raw materials (CRM). Recycling could address rising demand, particularly in Europe, where the supply of CRMs like cobalt, nickel, and lithium is crucial for clean energy technologies. By 2050, recycling could meet up to 77% of Europe's metal needs. However, challenges in recycling capacity, collection, and sorting must be addressed. Regulatory frameworks are evolving, with new rules on minimum recycling rates for battery metals, aiming to support this transition.
Technological uncertainties
Future trends in deep-sea mining are heavily influenced by technological advancements and fluctuating demand for critical materials. While projections for nickel demand by 2050 vary significantly—from 24 to 100 million tones emerging innovations, such as lithium-sulfur and sodium-ion batteries, could reduce reliance on certain minerals like nickel and cobalt. The ISA (2022) forecasts that, by 2035, deep-sea mining could yield up to 36 million tons of nodules annually, meeting a significant portion of global manganese, nickel, and cobalt demand. However, market volatility and advances in recycling could alter the feasibility of these operations.
History
In the 1960s, the prospect of deep-sea mining was assessed in J. L. Mero's Mineral Resources of the Sea. Nations including France, Germany and the United States dispatched research vessels in search of deposits. Initial estimates of DSM viability were exaggerated. Depressed metal prices led to the near abandonment of nodule mining by 1982. From the 1960s to 1984 an estimated US$650 million was spent on the venture, with little to no return.
A 2018 article argued that "the 'new global gold rush' of deep sea mining shares many features with past resource scrambles – including a general disregard for environmental and social impacts, and the marginalisation of indigenous peoples and their rights".
2000s
In 2001, China Ocean Mineral Resources Research and Development Association (COMRA), received China's first exploration license.
2020s
Protests
In December 2023, the research vessel MV Coco was disrupted by Greenpeace activists blocking the collection of data to support a mining permit. Obstructing canoes and dinghies were countered by water hoses. The mining ship was conducting research for The Metals Company. The vessel MV Coco is owned by Magellan.
BMW pledged not to use DSM materials in its cars. In October 2023, the UK joined Canada and New Zealand in calling for a moratorium. In the beginning of August 2024, 32 countries were against the immediate commencement of deep sea mining. In December 2025, Norway decided to stop deep sea mining projects in its territory, at least until 2029.
The Indigenous Perspective
For many Indigenous communities, the ocean is a central part of their origin story. Even for those without such direct connection, the ocean is often connected to sacred cultural practices. In the Pacific Island States, navigation of the oceans is a traditional practice that relies on several factors including color of the ocean, the shape of the waves, and the migratory patterns of sea creatures that could be negatively impacted by deep sea mining. Despite the cultural relevance Indigenous communities have in discussions of ocean sovereignty and deep sea mining, they have been left out of many important international conversations. In 2021, seventy-two indigenous groups from around the world came together as the Blue Climate Initiative, and called for an immediate ban on deep sea mining. In a similar statement, the Saami people of the Norwegian peninsula have urged the Norwegian government to stop deep sea mining operations and seek out Indigenous communities' perspectives and knowledge to ensure sustainability.
Alternatives
The environmental organization "The Oxygen Project" generally proposes, as an alternative to deep sea mining, "system change to sustainable alternative economic models that don't require infinite resource extraction from our environment". The Environmental Justice Foundation and Greenpeace proposed circular economy, public transport, and less car dependency, energy efficiency and resource efficiency.
A possible alternative would be to reduce the weight of the mining tools. Ideally, this would mitigate some of the environmental issues with plumes, disturbing the sea floor, and other forms of underwater habitat destruction. Other alternatives include adding a collection device that would minimize debris and water columns or strip-mining, which would leave some sections, or strips, of the sea floor undisturbed with the intention of spacing out environmental disturbances. Other environmental mitigation options include changing the ways that the materials are processed, transferred, and transported. Many issues such as improper waste disposal, spilling of materials, and oil spills happen at this stage in the mining process. Properly following regulations regarding these activities as well as careful attention to these issues is suggested to reduce the amount of waste at this level.

Deforestation is a primary contributor to climate change, and climate change affects the health of forests. Land use change, especially in the form of deforestation, is the second largest source of carbon dioxide emissions from human activities, after the burning of fossil fuels. Greenhouse gases are emitted from deforestation during the burning of forest biomass and decomposition of remaining plant material and soil carbon. Global models and national greenhouse gas inventories give similar results for deforestation emissions. As of 2019, deforestation is responsible for about 11% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Carbon emissions from tropical deforestation are accelerating.
When forests grow they are a carbon sink and therefore have potential to mitigate the effects of climate change. Some of the effects of climate change, such as more wildfires, invasive species, and extreme weather events can lead to more forest loss. The relationship between deforestation and climate change is one of a positive (amplifying) climate feedback. The more trees that are removed, the greater the effect of climate change which then
results in the loss of more trees.
Forests cover 31% of the land area on Earth. Every year, 75,700 square kilometers (18.7 million acres) of the forest is lost. There was a 12% increase in the loss of primary tropical forests from 2019 to 2020.
Deforestation has many causes, among them agricultural clearcutting, livestock grazing, logging for timber, and wildfires.
Causes of deforestation
Causes due to climate change
Effects of deforestation on climate change
Irreversible deforestation would result in a permanent rise in the global surface temperature. Moreover, it suggests that standing tropical forests help cool the average global temperature by more than 1 °C or 1.8 °F.
Deforestation of tropical forests may risk triggering tipping points in the climate system and of forest ecosystem collapse which would also have effects on climate change.
Several studies since the early 1990s have shown that large-scale deforestation north of 50°N leads to overall net global cooling while tropical deforestation produces substantial warming. Carbon-centric metrics are inadequate because biophysical mechanisms other than CO2 impacts are important, especially the much higher albedo of bare high-latitude ground vis-à-vis intact forest.
Deforestation, particularly in large swaths of the Amazon, where nearly 20% of the rainforest has been clear cut, has climactic effects and effects on water sources as well as on the soil. Moreover, the type of land usage after deforestation also produces varied results. When deforested land is converted to pasture land for livestock grazing it has a greater effect on the ecosystem than forest to cropland conversions. Other effect of deforestation in the Amazon rainforest is seen through the greater amount of carbon dioxide emission. The Amazon rainforest absorbs one-fourth of the carbon dioxide emissions on Earth, however, the amount of CO2 absorbed today decreases by 30% than it was in the 1990s due to deforestation.
Modeling studies have concluded that there are two crucial moments that can lead to devastating effects in the Amazon rainforest which are increase in temperature by 4 °C or 7.2 °F and deforestation reaching a level of 40%.
Forest fires
Statistics have shown a direct correlation between forest fires and deforestation. Statistics regarding the Brazilian Amazon area during the early 2000s have shown that fires and the air pollution that accompanies these fires mirror the patterns of deforestation and "high deforestation rates led to frequent fires".
The Amazon rainforest has experienced fires inside the forest as well as wildfires on its outer edges. Wetlands have faced an increase in forest fires as well. Due to the change in temperature, the climate around forests have become warm and dry, conditions that allow forest fires to occur.
Under unmitigated climate change, by the end of the century, 21% of the Amazon would be vulnerable to post‐fire grass invasion. In 3% of the Amazon, fire return intervals are already shorter than the time required for grass exclusion by canopy recovery, implying a high risk of irreversible shifts to a fire‐maintained degraded forest grassy state. The south‐eastern region of the Amazon is currently at highest risk of irreversible degradation.
According to a study in tropical peatland forest of Borneo, deforestation also contributes to the increase in fire risk.
Carbon sequestration through forestry
Concerns with forestry projects
Changes in rainfall
As a consequence of reduced evapotranspiration, precipitation is also reduced. This implies having a hotter and drier climate, and a longer dry season. This change in climate has drastic ecological and global impacts including increases in severity and frequency of fires, and disruption in the pollination process that will likely spread beyond the area of deforestation.
According to a study published in 2023, tropical deforestation has led to a significant decrease in the amount of observed precipitation. By the year 2100, researchers anticipate that deforestation in the Congo will diminish regional precipitation levels by up to 8-10%.
Decreasing albedo
Deforestation changes the landscape and reflectivity of earth's surface, i.e. decreasing Albedo. This results in an increase in the absorption of light energy from the sun in the form of heat, enhancing global warming.
Policies and programs to reduce deforestation
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries
The Bali Action Plan
The Bali Action Plan was developed in December 2007 in Bali, Indonesia. It is a direct result of the Kyoto Protocol of December 1997. One of the key elements of The Bali Action Plan involves a concerted effort by the member countries of the Kyoto Protocol to enact and create policy approaches that incentivize emissions reduction caused by deforestation and forest degradation in the developing world. It emphasized the importance of sustainable forest management and conservation practices in mitigating climate change. This coupled with the increased attention to carbon emission stocks as a way to provide additional resource flows to the developing countries.
Trillion Tree Campaign
The Billion Tree Campaign was launched in 2006 by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as a response to the challenges of climate change, as well as to a wider array of sustainability challenges, from water supply to biodiversity loss. Its initial target was the planting of one billion trees in 2007. Only one year later in 2008, the campaign's objective was raised to 7 billion trees—a target to be met by the climate change conference that was held in Copenhagen, Denmark in December 2009. Three months before the conference, the 7 billion planted trees mark had been surpassed. In December 2011, after more than 12 billion trees had been planted, UNEP formally handed management of the program over to the not-for-profit Plant-for-the-Planet initiative, based in Munich, Germany.
The Amazon Fund (Brazil)

In geology and materials science, a deformation mechanism is a process occurring at a microscopic scale that is responsible for deformation: changes in a material's internal structure, shape and volume. The process involves planar discontinuity and/or displacement of atoms from their original position within a crystal lattice structure. These small changes are preserved in various microstructures of materials such as rocks, metals and plastics, and can be studied in depth using optical or digital microscopy.
Processes
Deformation mechanisms are commonly characterized as brittle, ductile, and brittle-ductile. The driving mechanism responsible is an interplay between internal (e.g. composition, grain size and lattice-preferred orientation) and external (e.g. temperature and fluid pressure) factors. These mechanisms produce a range of micro-structures studied in rocks to constrain the conditions, rheology, dynamics, and motions of tectonic events. More than one mechanism may be active under a given set of conditions and some mechanisms can develop independently. Detailed microstructure analysis can be used to define the conditions and timing under which individual deformation mechanisms dominate for some materials. Common deformation mechanisms processes include:
§ Fracturing
§ Cataclastic flow
§ Grain boundary sliding
§ Diffusive mass transfer
§ Dislocation creep
§ Dynamic recrystallization (recovery)
Fracturing
Fracturing is a brittle deformation process that creates permanent linear breaks, that are not accompanied by displacement within materials. These linear breaks or openings can be independent or interconnected. For fracturing to occur, the ultimate strength of the materials need to be exceeded to a point where the material ruptures. Rupturing is aided by the accumulations of high differential stress (the difference between the maximum and minimum stress acting on the object). Most fracture grow into faults. However, the term fault is only used when the fracture plane accommodate some degree of movement. Fracturing can happen across all scales, from microfractures to macroscopic fractures and joints in the rocks.
Cataclastic flow
Cataclasis, or comminution, is a non-elastic brittle mechanism that operates under low to moderate homologous temperatures, low confining pressure and relatively high strain rates. It occurs only above a certain differential stress level, which is dependent on fluid pressure and temperature. Cataclasis accommodates the fracture and crushing of grains, causing grain size reduction, along with frictional sliding on grain boundaries and rigid body grain rotation. Intense cataclasis occurs in thin zones along slip or fault surfaces where extreme grain size reduction occurs. In rocks, cataclasis forms a cohesive and fine-grained fault rock called cataclasite. Cataclastic flow occurs during shearing when a rock deform by microfracturing and frictional sliding where tiny fractures (microcracks), and associated rock fragments move past each other. Cataclastic flow usually occurs at diagenetic to low-grade metamorphic conditions. However, this depends on the mineralogy of the material and the extent of pore fluid pressure. Cataclastic flow is generally unstable and will terminate by the localization of deformation into slip on fault planes.
Grain boundary sliding
Grain boundary sliding is a plastic deformation mechanism where crystals can slide past each other without friction and without creating significant voids as a result of diffusion. The deformation process associated with this mechanism is referred to as granular flow. The absence of voids results from solid-state diffusive mass transfer, locally enhanced crystal plastic deformation, or solution and precipitation of a grain boundary fluid. This mechanism operates at a low strain rate produced by neighbor switching. Grain boundary sliding is grain size- and temperature-dependent. It is favored by high temperatures and the presence of very fine-grained aggregates where diffusion paths are relatively short. Large strains operating in this mechanism do not result in the development of a lattice preferred orientation or any appreciable internal deformation of the grains, except at the grain boundary to accommodate the grain sliding; this process is called superplastic deformation.
Diffusive mass transfer
In this group of mechanisms, the strain is accommodated by migration of vacancies in crystallographic lattice. This results in a change in crystal shape involving the transfer of mass by diffusion. These migrations are oriented towards sites of maximum stress and are limited by the grain boundaries; which conditions a crystallographic shape fabric or strain. The result is a more perfect crystal. This process is grain-size sensitive and occurs at low strain rates or very high temperatures, and is accommodated by migration of lattice defects from areas of low to those of high compressive stress. The main mechanisms of diffusive mass transfer are Nabarro-Herring creep, Coble creep, and pressure solution.
Nabarro–herring creep, or volume diffusion, acts at high homologous temperatures and is grain size dependent with the strain-rate inversely proportional to the square of the grain size (creep rate decreases as the grain size increases). During Nabarro-Herring creep, the diffusion of vacancies occurs through the crystal lattice (microtectonics), which causes grains to elongate along the stress axis. Nabarro-Herring creep has a weak stress dependence.
Coble creep, or grain-boundary diffusion, is the diffusion of vacancies occurs along grain-boundaries to elongate the grains along the stress axis. Coble creep has a stronger grain-size dependence than Nabarro–Herring creep, and occurs at lower temperatures while remaining temperature dependent. It play a more important role than Nabarro–Herring creep and is more important in the deformation of the plastic crust.
Dislocation creep
Dislocation creep is a non-linear (plastic) deformation mechanism in which vacancies in the crystal glide and climb past obstruction sites within the crystal lattice. These migrations within the crystal lattice can occur in one or more directions and are triggered by the effects of increased differential stress. It occurs at lower temperatures relative to diffusion creep. The mechanical process presented in dislocation creep is called slip. The principal direction in which dislocation takes place are defined by a combination of slip planes and weak crystallographic orientations resulting from vacancies and imperfections in the atomic structure. Each dislocation causes a part of the crystal to shift by one lattice point along the slip plane, relative to the rest of the crystal. Each crystalline material has different distances between atoms or ions in the crystal lattice, resulting in different lengths of displacement. The vector that characterizes the length and orientation of the displacement is called the Burgers vector. The development of strong lattice preferred orientation can be interpreted as evidence for dislocation creep as dislocations move only in specific lattice planes.
Dislocation glide cannot act on its own to produce large strains due to the effects of strain-hardening, where a dislocation ‘tangle’ can inhibit the movement of other dislocations, which then pile up behind the blocked ones causing the crystal to become difficult to deform. Diffusion and dislocation creep can occur simultaneously. The effective viscosity of a stressed material under given conditions of temperature, pressure, and strain rate will be determined by the mechanism that delivers the smallest viscosity. Some form of recovery process, such as dislocation climb or grain-boundary migration must also be active. Slipping of the dislocation results in a more stable state for the crystal as the pre-existing imperfection is removed. It requires much lower differential stress than that required for brittle fracturing. This mechanism does not damage the mineral or reduce the internal strength of crystals.
Dynamic recrystallization
Dynamic recrystallization is the process of removing the internal strain that remains in grains during deformation. This happens by the reorganization of a material with a change in grain size, shape, and orientation within the same mineral. When recrystallization occurs after deformation has come to an end and particularly at high temperatures, the process is called static recrystallization or annealing. Dynamic recrystallization results in grain size-reduction and static recrystallization results in the formation of larger equant grains.
Dynamic recrystallization can occur under a wide range of metamorphic conditions, and can strongly influence the mechanical properties of the deforming material. Dynamic recrystallization is the result of two end-member processes: (1) The formation and rotation of subgrains (rotation recrystallization) and (2) grain-boundary migration (migration recrystallization).
Rotation recrystallization (subgrain rotation) is the progressive misorientation of a subgrain as more dislocations move into the dislocation wall (a zone of dislocations resulting from climb, cross-slip, and glide), which increases the crystallographic mismatch across the boundary. Eventually, the misorientation across the boundary is sufficiently large enough to recognize individual grains (usually 10–15° misorientation). Grains tend to be elongate or ribbon-shape, with many subgrains, with a characteristic gradual transition from low-angle subgrains to high-angle boundaries.
Migration recrystallization (grain-boundary migration) is the processes by which a grain grows at the expense of the neighboring grains. At low temperatures, the mobility of the grain boundary may be local, and the grain boundary may bulge into a neighboring grain with a high dislocation density and form new, smaller, independent crystals by a process called low-temperature grain boundary migration, or bulging recrystallization. The bulges produced can separate from the original grain to form new grains by the formation of subgrain (low-angle) boundaries, which can evolve into grain boundaries, or by migration of the grain boundary. Bulging recrystallization often occurs along boundaries of old grains at triple junctions. At high temperatures, the growing grain has a lower dislocation density than the grain(s) consumed, and the grain boundary sweeps through the neighboring grains to remove dislocations by high-temperature grain-boundary migration crystallization. Grain boundaries are lobate with a variable grain size, with new grains generally larger than existing subgrains. At very high temperatures, grains are highly lobate or ameboid, but can be nearly strain-free.
Deformation mechanism map
A deformation mechanism map is a way of representing the dominant deformation mechanism in a material loaded under a given set of conditions. The technique is applicable to all crystalline materials, metallurgical as well as geological. Additionally, work has been conducted regarding the use of deformation maps to nanostructured or very fine grain materials. Deformation mechanism maps usually consist of some kind of stress plotted against some kind of temperature axis, typically stress normalized using the shear modulus versus homologous temperature with contours of strain rate. The normalized shear stress is plotted on a log scale. While plots of normalized shear stress vs. homologous temperature are most common, other forms of deformation mechanism maps include shear strain rate vs. normalized shear stress and shear strain rate vs. homologous temperature. Thus deformation maps can be constructed using any two of stress (normalized), temperature (normalized), and strain rate, with contours of the third variable. A stress/strain rate plot is useful because power-law mechanisms then have contours of temperature which are straight lines.
For a given set of operating conditions, calculations are conducted and experiments performed to determine the predominant mechanism operative for a given material. Constitutive equations for the type of mechanism have been developed for each deformation mechanism and are used in the construction of the maps. The theoretical shear strength of the material is independent of temperature and located along the top of the map, with the regimes of plastic deformation mechanisms below it. Constant strain rate contours can be constructed on the maps using the constitutive equations of the deformation mechanisms which makes the maps extremely useful.
Process maps
The same technique has been used to construct process maps for sintering, diffusion bonding, hot isostatic pressing, and indentation.
Construction
Repeated experiments are performed to characterize the mechanism by which the material deforms. The dominant mechanism is the one which dominates the continuous deformation rate (strain rate), however at any given level of stress and temperature, more than one of the creep and plasticity mechanisms may be active. The boundaries between the fields are determined from the constitutive equations of the deformation mechanisms by solving for stress as a function of temperature. Along these boundaries, the deformation rates for the two neighboring mechanisms are equal. The programming code used for many of the published maps is open source
and an archive of its development is online. Many researchers have also written their own codes to make these maps.
The main regions in a typical deformation mechanism map and their constitutive equations are shown in the following subsections.
Plasticity region
The plasticity region is at the top of deformation map (at the highest normalized stresses), and is below the boundary set by the ideal strength. In this region the strain rate involves an exponential term. This equation is shown below, where
σ
s
{\displaystyle \sigma _{s}}
is the applied shear stress,
μ
{\displaystyle \mu }
is the shear modulus,
Δ
E
{\displaystyle \Delta E}
is the energy barrier to dislocation glide, k is the Boltzmann constant, and
τ
^
{\displaystyle {\widehat {\tau }}}
is the "athermal flow strength" which is a function of the obstacles to dislocation glide.
γ
˙
∝
(
σ
s
μ
)
2
exp
⁡
[
−
Δ
E
k
T
(
1
−
σ
s
τ
^
)
]
{\displaystyle {\dot {\gamma }}\propto ({\frac {\sigma _{s}}{\mu }})^{2}\exp[-{\frac {\Delta E}{kT}}(1-{\frac {\sigma _{s}}{\widehat {\tau }}})]}
Power Law creep region
In this region, the dominant deformation mechanism is power law creep, such that the strain rate goes as the stress raised to a stress exponent n. This region is dominated by dislocation creep. The value of this stress exponent is dependent upon the material and the microstructure. If deformation is occurring by slip, n=1-8, and for grain boundary sliding n=2 or 4.
The general equation for power law creep is as follows, where
A
2
{\displaystyle A_{2}}
is a dimensionless constant relating shear strain rate and stress, μ is the shear modulus, b is the Burger's vector, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, n is the stress exponent,
σ
s
{\displaystyle \sigma _{s}}
is the applied shear stress, and
D
e
f
f
{\displaystyle D_{eff}}
is the effective diffusion constant.
γ
˙
A
2
D
e
f
f
μ
b
k
T
(
σ
s
μ
)
n
{\displaystyle {\dot {\gamma }}={\frac {A_{2}D_{eff}\mu b}{kT}}({\frac {\sigma _{s}}{\mu }})^{n}}
Within the power law creep region, there are two subsections corresponding to low temperature power law creep that is dominated by core controlled dislocation motion and high temperature power law creep that is controlled by diffusion in the lattice. Low temperature core diffusion, sometimes called pipe diffusion, occurs because dislocations are more quickly able to diffuse through the pipe-like core of a dislocation. The effective diffusion coefficient in the strain rate equation depends on whether or not the system is dominated by core diffusion or lattice diffusion and can be generalized as follows where
D
v
{\displaystyle D_{v}}
is the volumetric lattice diffusion constant,
a
c
{\displaystyle a_{c}}
is the area corresponding to the dislocation core,
D
c
{\displaystyle D_{c}}
is the diffusion coefficient for the core, and b is the Burger's vector.
D
e
f
f
D
v
+
10
(
σ
s
μ
)
2
a
c
D
c
b
2
{\displaystyle D_{eff}=D_{v}+10({\frac {\sigma _{s}}{\mu }})^{2}{\frac {a_{c}D_{c}}{b^{2}}}}
In the high temperature region, the effective diffusion constant is simply the volumetric lattice diffusion constant, whereas at low temperatures the diffusion constant is given by the expression
10
(
σ
s
μ
)
2
a
c
D
c
b
2
{\displaystyle 10({\frac {\sigma _{s}}{\mu }})^{2}{\frac {a_{c}D_{c}}{b^{2}}}}
. Thus in the high temperature power law creep region, the strain rate goes as
(
σ
s
μ
)
n
{\displaystyle ({\frac {\sigma _{s}}{\mu }})^{n}}
, and in the low temperature power law creep region the strain rate goes as
(
σ
s
μ
)
n
+
2
{\displaystyle ({\frac {\sigma _{s}}{\mu }})^{n+2}}
.
Diffusional flow region
Diffusional flow is a regime typically below dislocation creep and occurs at high temperatures due to the diffusion of point defects in the material. Diffusional flow can be further broken down into more specific mechanisms: Nabarro–Herring creep, Coble creep, and Harper–Dorn creep.
While most materials will exhibit Nabarro-Herring creep and Coble creep, Harper-Dorn creep is quite rare, having only been reported in a select few materials at low stresses including aluminium, lead, and tin.
The equation for Nabarro-Herring creep is dominated by vacancy diffusion within the lattice, whereas Coble creep is dominated by vacancy diffusion within the grain boundaries. The equation for these mechanisms is shown below where
σ
s
{\displaystyle \sigma _{s}}
is the applied shear stress, Ω is the atomic volume, k is the Boltzmann constant ,d is the grain size, T is the temperature, and
D
e
f
f
{\displaystyle D_{eff}}
is the effective diffusion coefficient.
γ
˙
α
″
D
e
f
f
d
2
Ω
σ
k
T
{\displaystyle {\dot {\gamma }}=\alpha ''{\frac {D_{eff}}{d^{2}}}{\frac {\Omega \sigma }{kT}}}
The effective diffusion coefficient,
D
e
f
f
{\displaystyle D_{eff}}
D
v
{\displaystyle D_{v}}
(the volumetric diffusion constant) for Nabarro-Herring creep which dominates at high temperatures, and
D
e
f
f
π
δ
d
D
b
{\displaystyle D_{eff}={\frac {\pi \delta }{d}}D_{b}}
(where
δ
{\displaystyle \delta }
is the grain boundary width and
D
b
{\displaystyle D_{b}}
is the diffusion coefficient in the boundary) for Coble creep which dominates at low-temperatures.
From these equations it becomes clear that the boundary between boundary diffusion and lattice diffusion is heavily dependent on grain size. For systems with larger grains, the Nabarro-Herring lattice diffusion region of the deformation mechanism map will be larger than in maps with very small grains. Additionally, the larger the grains, the less diffusional creep and thus the power-law creep region of the map will be larger for large grained materials. Grain boundary engineering is thus an effective strategy to manipulate creep rates.
Reading
For a given stress profile and temperature, the point lies in a particular "deformation field". If the values place the point near the center of a field, it is likely that the primary mechanism by which the material will fail, i.e.: the type and rate of failure expected, grain boundary diffusion, plasticity, Nabarro–Herring creep, etc. If however, the stress and temperature conditions place the point near the boundary between two deformation mechanism regions then the dominating mechanism is less clear. Near the boundary of the regimes there can be a combination of mechanisms of deformation occurring simultaneously. Deformation mechanism maps are only as accurate as the number of experiments and calculations undertaken in their creation.
For a given stress and temperature, the strain rate and deformation mechanism of a material is given by a point on the map. By comparing maps of various materials, crystal structures, bonds, grain sizes, etc., studies of these materials properties on plastic flow can be conducted and a more complete understanding of deformation in materials is obtained.
Examples
Above the theoretical shear strength of the material, a type of defect-less flow can still occur, shearing the material. Dislocation motion through glide (any temperature) or dislocation creep (at high temperatures) is a typical mechanism found at high stresses in deformation maps.
Deformation Mechanisms in Polymers
Polymer melts exhibit different deformation mechanisms when subjected to shear or tensile stresses. For example, a polymer melt’s ductility can increase when a stimulus, such as light, causes fragmentation of the polymer chains through bond breaking. This process is known as chain scission. In the low temperature regime of a polymer melt (T < Tg), crazing or shear banding can occur. The former mechanism resembles crack formation, but this deformation mechanism actually involves the formation of fibrils separated by porous domains or voids. The latter mechanism (shear banding) involves the formation of localized regions of plastic deformation, which typically arise near the position of the maximal shear point in a polymer melt. Crazing and shear banding are deformation mechanisms observed in glassy polymers.
For crystalline polymers, the deformation mechanism is best described by a stress-strain curve for a crystalline polymer, such as nylon. The stress-strain behavior exhibits four characteristic regions. The first region is the linear-elastic regime, where the stress-strain behavior is elastic with no plastic deformation. The characteristic deformation mechanism in the second region is yielding, where plastic deformation can occur in the form phenomena such as twinning. The third region shows the formation of a neck, and the fourth region is characterized as a steep increase in stress due to viscous flow. Additionally, region four corresponds to alignment and elongation of the polymer backbone from its coiled or folded state—eventually leading to fracture.

A dendrite in metallurgy is a characteristic tree-like structure of crystals growing as molten metal solidifies, the shape produced by faster growth along energetically favourable crystallographic directions. This dendritic growth has large consequences in regard to material properties.
Formation
Dendrites form in unary (one-component) systems as well as multi-component systems. The requirement is that the liquid (the molten material) be undercooled, aka supercooled, below the freezing point of the solid. Initially, a spherical solid nucleus grows in the undercooled melt. As the sphere grows, the spherical morphology becomes unstable and its shape becomes perturbed. The solid shape begins to express the preferred growth directions of the crystal. This growth direction may be due to anisotropy in the surface energy of the solid–liquid interface, or to the ease of attachment of atoms to the interface on different crystallographic planes, or both (for an example of the latter, see hopper crystal). In metallic systems, interface attachment kinetics is usually negligible (for non-negligible cases, see dendrite (crystal)). The solid then attempts to minimize the area of those surfaces with the highest surface energy. The dendrite thus exhibits a sharper and sharper tip as it grows. If the anisotropy is large enough, the dendrite may present a faceted morphology. The microstructural length scale is determined by the interplay or balance between the surface energy and the temperature gradient (which drives the heat/solute diffusion) in the liquid at the interface.
As solidification proceeds, an increasing number of atoms lose their kinetic energy, making the process exothermic. For a pure material, latent heat is released at the solid–liquid interface so that the temperature remains constant until the melt has completely solidified. The growth rate of the resultant crystalline substance will depend on how fast this latent heat can be conducted away. A dendrite growing in an undercooled melt can be approximated as a parabolic needle-like crystal that grows in a shape-preserving manner at constant velocity. Nucleation and growth determine the grain size in equiaxed solidification while the competition between adjacent dendrites decides the primary spacing in columnar growth. Generally, if the melt is cooled slowly, nucleation of new crystals will be less than at large undercooling. The dendritic growth will result in dendrites of a large size. Conversely, a rapid cooling cycle with a large undercooling will increase the number of nuclei and thus reduce the size of the resulting dendrites (and often lead to small grains).
Smaller dendrites generally lead to higher ductility of the product. One application where dendritic growth and resulting material properties can be seen is the process of welding. The dendrites are also common in cast products, where they may become visible by etching of a polished specimen.
As dendrites develop further into the liquid metal, they get hotter because they continue to extract heat. If they get too hot, they will remelt. This remelting of the dendrites is called recalescence. Dendrites usually form under non-equilibrium conditions.
Computational modeling
The first computational model of dendritic solidification was published by Kobayashi, who used a phase-field model to solve two coupled partial differential equations describing the evolution of the phase-field,
ϕ
{\displaystyle \phi }
(with
ϕ
0
{\displaystyle \phi =0}
in the liquid phase and
ϕ
1
{\displaystyle \phi =1}
in the solid phase), and the temperature field,
T
{\displaystyle T}
, for a pure material in two dimensions:
τ
∂
ϕ
∂
t
−
∂
∂
x
(
ϵ
∂
ϵ
∂
θ
∂
ϕ
∂
y
)
+
∂
∂
y
(
ϵ
∂
ϵ
∂
θ
∂
ϕ
∂
x
)
+
∇
⋅
(
ϵ
2
∇
ϕ
)
+
ϕ
(
1
−
ϕ
)
(
ϕ
−
1
2
+
m
+
a
χ
)
{\displaystyle \tau {\frac {\partial \phi }{\partial t}}=-{\frac {\partial }{\partial x}}\left(\epsilon {\frac {\partial \epsilon }{\partial \theta }}{\frac {\partial \phi }{\partial y}}\right)+{\frac {\partial }{\partial y}}\left(\epsilon {\frac {\partial \epsilon }{\partial \theta }}{\frac {\partial \phi }{\partial x}}\right)+\nabla \cdot \left(\epsilon ^{2}\nabla \phi \right)+\phi (1-\phi )\left(\phi -{\frac {1}{2}}+m+a\chi \right)}
which is an Allen-Cahn equation with an anisotropic gradient energy coefficient:
ϵ
(
θ
)
ϵ
¯
[
1
+
δ
cos
⁡
(
j
θ
)
]
{\displaystyle \epsilon (\theta )={\bar {\epsilon }}\left[1+\delta \cos(j\theta )\right]}
where
ϵ
¯
{\displaystyle {\bar {\epsilon }}}
is an average value of
ϵ
{\displaystyle \epsilon }
,
θ
{\displaystyle \theta }
is the angle between the interface normal and the x-axis, and
δ
{\displaystyle \delta }
and
j
{\displaystyle j}
are constants representing the strength and mode of anisotropy, respectively.
The parameter
m
{\displaystyle m}
describes the thermodynamic driving force for solidification, which Kobayashi defines for a supercooled melt as:
m
(
T
)
α
π
tan
−
1
⁡
[
γ
(
T
e
−
T
)
]
{\displaystyle m(T)={\frac {\alpha }{\pi }}\tan ^{-1}\left[\gamma (T_{e}-T)\right]}
where
α
{\displaystyle \alpha }
is a constant between 0 and 1,
γ
{\displaystyle \gamma }
is a positive constant, and
T
e
{\displaystyle T_{e}}
is the dimensionless equilibrium temperature. The temperature has been non-dimensionalized such that the equilibrium temperature is
T
e
1
{\displaystyle T_{e}=1}
and the initial temperature of the undercooled melt is
T
0
{\displaystyle T=0}
.
The evolution equation for the temperature field is given by
∂
T
∂
t
∇
2
T
+
K
∂
ϕ
∂
t
{\displaystyle {\frac {\partial T}{\partial t}}=\nabla ^{2}T+K{\frac {\partial \phi }{\partial t}}}
and is simply the heat equation with a source term due to the evolution of latent heat upon solidification, where
K
{\displaystyle K}
is a constant representing the latent heat normalized by the strength of the cooling.
When this system is numerically evolved, random noise representing thermal fluctuations is introduced to the interface via the
a
χ
{\displaystyle a\chi }
term, where
a
{\displaystyle a}
is the magnitude of the noise and
χ
{\displaystyle \chi }
is a random number distributed uniformly on
[
−
0.5
,
0.5
]
{\displaystyle [-0.5,0.5]}
.
Application
An application of dendritic growth in directional solidification is gas turbine engine blades which are used at high temperatures and must handle high stresses along the major axes. At high temperatures, grain boundaries are weaker than grains. In order to minimize the effect on properties, grain boundaries are aligned parallel to the dendrites. The first alloy used in this application was a nickel-based alloy (MAR M-200) with 12.5% tungsten, which accumulated in the dendrites during solidification. This resulted in blades with high strength and creep resistance extending along the length of the casting, giving improved properties compared to the traditionally-cast equivalent.

In archaeology, a denticulate tool is a stone tool containing one or more edges that are worked into multiple notched shapes (or teeth), much like the toothed edge of a saw. Such tools have been used as saws for woodworking, processing meat and hides, craft activities and for agricultural purposes. Denticulate tools were used by many different groups worldwide and have been found at a number of notable archaeological sites. They can be made from a number of different lithic materials, but a large number of denticulate tools are made from flint.
Due to the nature of denticulate tools they can be difficult to classify, this leads to what is known as a 'typology dilemma'. It can be difficult for archaeologists to sort and classify these tools because it is impossible for them to know if the notches were created intentionally, or if they are a result of unintentional damage. Incorrectly classifying items found at archaeological sites is problematic because it can have a significant impact on how the tools and the site are interpreted by archaeologists.
These tools are included in the Mousterian tool industry by Neanderthal culture, proceeded by small hand axes and side scrapers.
Uses
Denticulate tools have many different uses which can differ based on the material, size and shape of the tool. The tools can be used for woodworking, processing meat and hides, craft activities and agricultural purposes.
Woodworking
Experiments carried out by archaeologists found that using denticulate tools "seem to provide more control when working wood than a raw flake or even a scraper might", because they hold their position well on the wood because of the notches. Shaped wooden artefacts have been found uncovered at sites alongside denticulate tools, suggesting these tools were used to shape these items. If denticulate tools are examined under a microscope and traces of use wear may suggest they were used to scrape wood, for example if the edges are more polished and uniform.
Meat and hide processing
There is evidence which suggests denticulate tools were also used on softer surfaces such as meat and hides. Use-wear analysis carried out on denticulate tools at sites in Spain and Italy suggests that they were "employed in hide-working and butchery activities" The sort of polish on the notches of a denticulate tool can also indicate it was used to scrape hides or skin.
Craft activities
Evidence shows that denticulate tools were used by Palaeolithic craftsmen. Some denticulate tools found in Spain have characteristics which suggest they were used for craft activities, in particular, crafts that required careful and precise action or work on small items such as needles or handles.
Agriculture
Researchers in China have examined denticulate tools found at Peiligang sites which show signs they were used for agricultural purposes, these specific tools are referred to as 'denticulate sickles'. Denticulate sickles are characterised by a denticulated cutting edge with grooves carved into it and a concave back opposite to grooves, one end of the tool is pointed and the other has a notch where a wooden handle may have once been connected. These tools can range in size from 10 to 20 cm and are made from soft lithic materials. Usewear analysis of these tools suggests they were used for harvesting cereals, cutting grass and reeds and stripping fruits and nuts from branches. However, findings concluded that "denticulate sickles were multi-purpose tools, rather than specialised implements for harvesting cereals."
There is also evidence that denticulate tools were used to carry out what is known as 'plant splitting', which involves using a tool and a specific and hand movement ("twist-of-the-wrist") to split bamboo shoots and reeds or to remove bark from trees Archaeologists have also theorised that it was the process plant splitting itself that created the notches on the denticulate tools, rather intentional retouch.
Distribution
Denticulate tools have a wide distribution and have been found in many places around the world, including Europe, Asia and Africa.
Notable Sites
Denticulate tools have been found at a number of notable archaeological sites around the world, include Pech de l'Aze IV and Payre in France, the El Collado site and el Miron Cave in Spain, Jiahu, Shigu and Egou in China and the Tabon Caves in the Philippines.
Pech de l'Azé IV
Pech de l'Azé IV is an archaeological site located in the south of France which was the home to Neanderthals during the Ice Age, 90,000-30,000 BCE. Over 20,000 lithic tools were found at the site during the most recent excavations, including 43 denticulate tools, which for the purpose of this excavation were classified as "types which have two or more adjacent notches". Some of the denticulate tools found at this site were made from very thin flakes and had complex notches resembling saws, which were most likely used for woodworking and for the processing of meat and hides. Francois Bordes, an archaeologist whose work focused on the typology of lithic tools, was involved in excavations at this site.
Payre
Payre is site located in Southeast France, by the Rhone River and human remains excavated at the site reveal that it was home to humans of the Neanderthal lineage. Researchers identified a number of stone tools at the site, which included 49 denticulates, made from either flint or quartz. Researchers found that out of all the types of stone tools found at the site, the denticulate tools were made from the largest and thickest flakes.
El Collado
El Collado is a Mesolithic funerary site in Spain where a number of denticulate tools were found. Analysis of these tools indicates that they were used in craft activities that involved working with wood and bone. The denticulate tools found at this site were mainly made from flint.
el Mirón Cave
The el Mirón Cave in Spain is another site with an abundant lithic artefact assemblage, which includes denticulate tools, which are assumed to have been used as domestic tools. However, denticulate tools only made up a small number of the lithic tools found at this site. The lithic tools found at this site were made from local non-flint materials and non-local flint materials.
Jiahu, Shigu and Egou
Jiahu, Shigu and Egou are Peiligang sites in China where denticulate tools have been found. The tools range from 10 to 20 cm in length and were most likely used for agricultural purposes. Denticulate tools found at these sites vary in shape “from a narrow body with a sharp-angled tip to a wide body with a more obtuse angled tip” and most have worn down teeth, indicating heavy usage.
Tabon Caves
41 denticulate tools were found in the Tabon Caves in the Philippines, which are thought to have been used for ‘plant splitting’. Some of tools found show evidence of intentional retouching while other denticulate tools may have been formed unintentionally.
Other
Egypt
A large proportion of the denticulate tools in the Metropolitan Museum of Art's collection come from different areas in Egypt. In ancient Egypt flint denticulate tools adhered to wooden handles were used to reap grain from the 5th to 4th millennia BC.
England
Denticulate tools have also been found in England, in the Robin Hood Cave and in Etton, Cambridgeshire
Raw Materials
Denticulate tools are usually made from flint, but can also be made from other materials such as limestone and quartz.
The availability and quality of the raw materials used to create denticulate tools is heavily influenced by the geographic area and analysis of raw materials and where they come from can provide information about the travel and trading habits of the inhabitants of the ancient sites.
Researchers at Pech de l'Azé IV identified denticulate tools made from different types of flint, including Coniacian flint, Campanian flint and Bergerac flint. At Pech de l'Azé IV 95% of lithic tools found were made from local raw materials and a small number of tools were made from exotic raw materials such as chalcedony. At Payre 47 of the denticulate tools found were made from flint and 4 were made from quartz.
Denticulate tools found at the Peiligang sites were made from a number of different raw materials including; tuff, sandstone, siltstone, mudstone, slate and siliceous limestone. These are softer lithic materials that allow for easier manufacture through filing and grinding.
Denticulate tools found at the Tabon Caves in the Philippines were made from red jasper, white chert and andesite.
The tools found at the el Mirón Cave were made from local non-flint materials and non-local flint materials.
Typology Dilemma
Denticulate tools have been proven to be relevant enough in the Mousterian tool industry to have been identified as a specific tool type in Typologie du Paléolithique ancien et moyen 1961, written by French archaeologist and geologist Francois Bordes. Many archaeologists use Bordes' typology when classifying lithic tools but this can prove difficult, especially “when too many questionable pieces appeared in an assemblage”. Even Bordes himself found it difficult when attempting to classify denticulate tools within his typology.
It is sometimes hard for typologists to tell whether lithic artefacts were retouched intentionally or unintentionally, for example as a result of wear over time or human trampling. The question then becomes:
“should the term denticulates be restricted to tools intentionally retouched or encompass all tools with adjacent notches whatever the origin of the latter is?”
It is important that lithic tools are accurately classified because the way these tools are sorted can impact how they are interpreted. Lithic tools can provide important information on the social and economic realities of the lives of the ancient people who were using them, so archaeologists must take care when attempting to classify them.
Archaeologists have run tests to see whether the human trampling of stone flakes can damage the edges of the flakes in a way that appears to be deliberate retouch. Flakes of chert and obsidian were used in the experiment, they were placed in substrate and then the archaeologists walked over the substrate and finally excavated the flakes. This experiment created what the archaeologists referred to as 'pseudo-tools', which resemble deliberately retouched Palaeolithic formal tools so closely that they would be classified as such. The archaeologists who carried out this study warn that, when working with denticulate tools "any typological analysis and conclusions about economic activities, social organisation, or cultural affinities must be made with caution"
The typology dilemma can also occur as a result of excavator bias, which impacts the way artefacts are classified and sorted and can distort the interpretation of the uncovered collection. Sometimes artefacts are thrown away because they are not recognised as artefacts at all, for example, an early excavator at the site of site of Combe-Capelle Bas discarded all the denticulate tools because they did not recognise them as 'valid tool types'. As a result, the collection was dominated by scrapers and did not accurately reflect the range of tools used at the site.
Types of Denticulate tools
Within the category of denticulate tools, there are further classifications that can be used when examining or studying the tools. Three different types have been distinguished based on the length of the notches on the cutting edge. Theodoropoulou, Moncel and Navarro (2009) describe the different types as follows:
macrodenticulates: with notches with lengths of more than 5mm
microdenticulates: with notches with lengths of less than 5mm the length of notches is smaller than 5 mm
festooned denticulates: with notches with lengths of more or less than 5mm the length of notches varies
The degree of modification of denticulate tools also can also be used to classify them further – with modification being considered either as small, average or invasive.

Deoxidization is a method used in metallurgy to remove the rest of oxygen content from previously reduced iron ore during steel manufacturing. In contrast, antioxidants are used for stabilization, such as in the storage of food. Deoxidation is important in the steelmaking process as oxygen is often detrimental to the quality of steel produced. Deoxidization is mainly achieved by adding a separate chemical species to neutralize the effects of oxygen or by directly removing the oxygen.
Oxidation
Oxidation is the process of an element losing electrons. For example, iron will transfer two of its electrons to oxygen, forming an oxide. This occurs all throughout as an unintended part of the steelmaking process.
Oxygen blowing is a method of steelmaking where oxygen is blown through pig iron to lower the carbon content. Oxygen forms oxides with the unwanted elements, such as carbon, silicon, phosphorus, and manganese, which appear from various stages of the manufacturing process. These oxides will float to the top of the steel pool and remove themselves from the pig iron. However, some of the oxygen will also react with the iron itself.
Due to the high temperatures involved in smelting, oxygen in the air may dissolve into the molten iron while it is being poured. Slag, a byproduct left over after the smelting process, is used to further absorb impurities such as sulfur or oxides and protect steel from further oxidation. However, it can still be responsible for some oxidation.
Some processes, while still able to lead to oxidation, are not relevant to the oxygen content of steel during its manufacture. For example, rust is a red iron oxide that forms when the iron in steel reacts with the oxygen or water in the air. This usually only occurs once the steel has been in use for varying lengths of time. Some physical components of the steelmaking process itself, such as the electric arc furnace, may also wear down and oxidize. This problem is typically dealt with by the use of refractory metals, which resist environmental conditions.
If steel is not properly deoxidized, it will have lost various properties such as tensile strength, ductility, toughness, weldability, polishability, and machinability. This is due to forming non-metallic inclusions and gas pores, bubbles of gas that get trapped during the solidification process of steel.
Types of deoxidizers
Metallic deoxidizers
This method of deoxidization involves adding specific metals into the steel. These metals will react with the unwanted oxygen, forming a strong oxide that, compared to pure oxygen, will reduce the steel's strength and qualities by a lesser amount.
The chemical equation for deoxidization is represented by:
n
D
+
m
O
⟶
D
n
O
m
{\displaystyle nD+mO\longrightarrow D_{n}O_{m}}
where n and m are coefficients, D is the deoxidizing agent, and O is oxygen.
Thus, the chemical equilibrium equation involved is:
K
e
q
a
o
x
/
(
a
D
n
∗
a
O
m
)
{\displaystyle K_{eq}=a_{ox}/(a_{D}^{n}*a_{O}^{m})}
where aox is the activity, or concentration, of the oxide in the steel,
aD is the activity of the deoxidizing agent,
and aO is the activity of the oxygen.
An increase in the equilibrium constant Keq will cause an increase in aox, and thus more of the oxide product.
Keq can be manipulated by the steel temperature via the following equation:
l
o
g
K
e
q
A
D
/
T
−
B
D
{\displaystyle logK_{eq}=A_{D}/T-B_{D}}
where AD and BD are parameters specific to different deoxidizers and T is the temperature in K°. Below are the values for certain deoxidizers at a temperature of 1873 K°.
Below is a list of commonly used metallic deoxidizers:
Ferrosilicon, ferromanganese, calcium silicide - used in steelmaking in production of carbon steels, stainless steels, and other ferrous alloys
Manganese - used in steelmaking
Silicon carbide, calcium carbide - used as ladle deoxidizer in steel production
Aluminum dross - also a ladle deoxidizer, used in secondary steelmaking
Calcium - used as a deoxidizer, desulfurizer, or decarbonizer for ferrous and non-ferrous alloys
Titanium - used as a deoxidizer for steels
Phosphorus, copper(I) phosphide - used in production of oxygen-free copper
Calcium hexaboride - used in production of oxygen-free copper, yields higher conductivity copper than phosphorus-deoxidized
Yttrium - used to deoxidize vanadium and other non-ferrous metals
Zirconium
Magnesium
Carbon
Tungsten
Vacuum deoxidation
Vacuum deoxidation is a method which involves using a vacuum to remove impurities. A portion of the carbon and oxygen in steel will react, forming carbon monoxide. CO gas will float up to the top of the liquid steel and be removed by a vacuum system.
As the chemical reaction involved in vacuum deoxidation is:
C
+
O
⟶
C
O
{\displaystyle C+O\longrightarrow CO}
the reaction between carbon and oxygen is represented by the following chemical equilibrium equation:
K
C
O
P
C
O
/
(
a
C
∗
a
O
)
{\displaystyle K_{CO}=P_{CO}/(a_{C}*a_{O})}
where PCO is the partial pressure of the carbon monoxide formed.
Decreasing the oxygen activity(aO) will raise the higher equilibrium constant, increasing CO production. To achieve this, subjecting the pool of steel to vacuum treatment decreases the value of PCO, allowing for more CO gas to be produced.
Diffusion deoxidation
This method relies on the idea that deoxidation of slag will lead to the deoxidation of steel.
The chemical equilibrium equation used for this process is:
K
F
e
O
a
[
O
]
/
a
(
O
)
{\displaystyle K_{FeO}=a_{[O]}/a_{(O)}}
where a[O] is the activity of the oxygen in the slag, and a(O) is the activity of oxygen in the steel.
Reducing the activity in the slag (a[O]) will lower the oxygen levels in the slag. Afterwards, oxygen will diffuse from the steel into the lesser concentrated slag. This method is done by using deoxidizing agents on the slag, such as coke or silicon. As these agents do not come into direct contact with the steel, non-metallic inclusions will not form in the steel itself.

Depletion gilding is a method for producing a layer of nearly pure gold on an object made of gold alloy by removing the other metals from its surface. It is sometimes referred to as a "surface enrichment" process.
Process
Most gilding methods are additive: they deposit gold that was not there before onto the surface of an object. By contrast, depletion gilding is a subtractive process whereby material is removed to increase the purity of gold that is already present on an object's surface.
In depletion gilding, other metals are etched away from the surface of an object composed of a gold alloy by the use of acids or salts, often in combination with heat. Since no gold is added, only an object made of an alloy that already contains gold can be depletion gilded.
Depletion gilding relies on the fact that gold is highly resistant to oxidation or corrosion by most common chemicals, whereas many other metals are not. Depletion gilding is most often used to treat alloys of gold with copper or silver. Unlike gold, both copper and silver readily react with a variety of chemicals. For example, nitric acid is effective as an etching agent for both copper and silver. Under the proper circumstances, even ordinary table salt will react with either metal.
The object to be gilded is coated, immersed, or packed in a suitable acid or salt, and usually heated to speed the process. These chemicals then attack the metallic copper and silver in the object's surface, transforming it to various copper and silver compounds. The resulting copper and silver compounds can be removed from the object's surface by a number of processes. Washing, chemical leaching, heating, or even physical absorption by porous materials such as brick dust have all been used historically. Meanwhile, the relatively inert gold is left unaffected. The result is a thin layer of nearly pure gold on the surface of the original object.
There is no well-defined minimum gold content required to successfully depletion gild an object. However, the less gold that is present, the more other material must be etched away to produce the desired surface appearance. In addition, the removal of the other metals usually leaves the surface covered with microscopic voids and pits. This can make the surface soft and "spongy" with a dull or matte appearance. This effect becomes more pronounced as more base metal is removed. For this reason, most depletion gilded objects are burnished to make their surfaces more durable and give them a more attractive polished finish.
Like other gilding processes, depletion gilding provides a way to produce the appearance of pure gold without its disadvantages: its cost and rarity, and its softness and denseness. By producing a layer of gold over a layer of copper or other metal, objects can be made that are lighter, sturdier, and cheaper while still appearing to be nearly pure gold.
Variations
The term depletion gilding usually refers to the production of a layer of gold. However, it can also be used to produce a layer that is an alloy of gold and silver, sometimes referred to as electrum. Certain chemicals, such as oxalic acid, attack copper but do not affect either silver or gold. Using such a chemical, it is possible to remove only the copper in an alloy, leaving both silver and the gold behind. Thus, if the original object is composed of copper, silver, and gold, it can be given a gold surface by removing both silver and copper, or an electrum surface by removing only the copper.
Likewise, with an appropriate chemical, a layer of nearly pure silver can be produced on an object made of copper and silver. For instance, sterling silver can be depleted—'depletion silvering'—to produce a fine silver surface, perhaps as preamble to application of gold, as in the Keum-boo technique.
However, in the majority of cases depletion gilding is in fact used to produce a gold finish, rather than one of electrum or silver.
Applications
Depletion gilding is a decorative process, with no significant industrial applications. It is not widely used in modern times, having been superseded by electroplating. Some individual artisans and small shops continue to practice it.
However, depletion gilding was widely used in antiquity. While it requires skill to execute it well, the process itself is technologically simple, and uses chemicals that were readily available to most ancient civilizations. Some form of depletion gilding has been used by nearly every culture that developed metalworking. The South American Sican culture in particular developed depletion gilding to a high art. Some ancient alloys, such as tumbaga, may have been developed specifically for use in depletion gilding. The technique was not known to be used by Anglo-Saxons until the twenty-first century, when detailed examination with electron microscopes of treasures such as the Staffordshire Hoard revealed its use.

This article details some of the history of lead mining in Derbyshire, England.
Background
Lutudarum (believed to have been at either Wirksworth or nearby Carsington) was the administrative centre of the Roman lead mining industry in Britain. Numerous lead ingots have been found in Derbyshire, in Sussex and around Hull with LVT, LVTVM or LVTVDARVM marked on them.
It has been claimed that Odin Mine, near Castleton, one of the oldest lead mines in England, may have been worked in the tenth century or even as early as Roman Britain, but it was certainly productive in the 1200s. Derbyshire lead mines are mentioned in the Pipe Rolls. Recent analysis of a Swiss ice-core extracted in 2013 indicates that levels of lead in atmospheric pollution between 1170 and 1216 were as high as those during the Industrial Revolution and correlate accurately with lead production from Peak District mines, the main European source at the time. On one of the walls in Wirksworth Church is a crude stone carving, found nearby at Bonsall and placed in the church in the 1870s. Probably executed in Anglo-Saxon times, it shows a man carrying a kibble or basket in one hand and a pick in the other. He is a lead miner. The north choir aisle of Wirksworth church is dominated by a far more ostentatious monument, a large ornate alabaster chest tomb, a memorial to Ralph Gell of Hopton, who died in 1563. The simple figure of the miner bears witness to the fact that for centuries the people of Wirksworth and their neighbours relied on lead mining. Ralph Gell's imposing tomb is evidence that a few people became rich and powerful from the trade.
While Derbyshire lead made Gell and others rich, for poor families it was both a living and an adventure, with the possibility of a better life from a lucky find. The industry was organised in a way that gave a measure of independence to many of them. Mining was hard and dangerous work: death, illness and injury came from poisonous lead dust, underground floods, falling rock, methane gas in shale workings and lack of oxygen in badly ventilated galleries. From the later years of the 17th century gunpowder introduced a further hazard. Nonetheless the thousands of shafts, hillocks and ruined buildings in the limestone landscape of the old lead mining areas, and the miles of galleries underground, make it plain that the veins of lead were intensively exploited. In the words of a petition to King Charles I "many thousand people are dailie imployed in the lead mynes, to the greatt proffitt of your Majestie ... and to the whole Comonwealth ... in getting great quantities of lead for the use of the Kingdome in generall, and in transporting the rest to forraigne Nations...".
By the 17th century lead was second in importance in the national economy only to wool. It was essential for the roofs of public buildings and the new houses being built in every part of the country by the nobility and gentry. All houses, including farmhouses and cottages by then, had glazed windows, with lead glazing bars. It was the only material for water storage and piping. Every army used it as ammunition. There was a thriving export trade as well as the home market and the Wirksworth area was the main source of the ore.
Wirksworth was the administrative centre of one of the hundreds of Derbyshire. The Wirksworth Hundred was still known by the archaic term wapentake. Lead ore was Crown property in most places and the mining area of Derbyshire under royal control was known as the King's Field, with two separately administered divisions, the High and Low Peaks, each further divided into liberties, based on parishes. Wirksworth Wapentake was the Low Peak area of the King's Field. At different times there were liberties based on Wirksworth, Middleton-by-Wirksworth, Cromford, Brassington, Matlock, Elton, Middleton-by-Youlgreave, Bonsall, Hopton and Carsington, and from 1638 until 1654 there was a separate liberty for the Dovegang, 200 acres (0.81 km2) on Cromford Moor which had become extremely productive after being drained by the first of the Derbyshire drainage schemes, or soughs.
There had always been lead mining in and around Wirksworth. This is limestone country and the fissures characteristic of limestone contained rich deposits of minerals, and especially of galena: lead ore. The Romans mined there and left inscribed "pigs", or ingots, of smelted lead as evidence. In the 9th century Repton Abbey owned mines at Wirksworth and when the abbey was destroyed by Danish troops in 874 they were taken by their Mercian puppet king Ceolwulf. They remained in royal hands after the Norman Conquest of England and paid royalties to the Crown for centuries afterwards. Lead mining and smelting was an established industry in 1086, when the mines at Wirksworth and Bakewell were recorded in the Domesday Book.
Mining methods
Lead had traditionally been found by following veins from surface outcroppings, particularly in "rakes" or vertical fissures. By the 17th century, however, most surface lead had been mined and prospecting was achieved by less direct methods. Miners searched for surface signs that were similar to known lead-rich areas, they checked ploughed and other disturbed land for traces of ore, and they checked for signs in plants and trees and poorly performing crops, since lead is poisonous to most living things. They used probes to check for signs of ore in soil a few feet under the surface and dug exploratory holes or trenches in promising places. This was usually done to choose the best places to sink shafts ahead of existing working and the rules defined when and where these activities could be carried out.
The miners sank their shafts in turns of up to 90 feet (27 metres), each turn being a few yards away from the bottom of the preceding one, along a gallery which may have been the working level reached by the earlier shaft. They climbed up and down their shafts using either footholes in the shaft walls or stemples, wooden steps built into the sides, an exhausting and dangerous way to start and finish a day's work. These climbing shafts were usually within the miners' coe, the limestone-walled cabin in which they stored tools, a change of clothes and food. Where the mine was on a hillside the vein could often be reached via an adit or tunnel driven into the slope.
Ore was brought to the surface up a winding shaft outside the coe. The miners' equipment included picks, hammers and wedges to split the rock, wiskets or baskets to contain it, corves or sledges to drag it to the shaft bottom, and windlasses or stows, to lift it to the surface. In later years underground transport was improved by replacing corves by wagons, often running on wooden or metal rails. A good example of an 18th-century wooden railway can be found in the Merry Tom mine, near Via Gellia. The miners avoided the need to excavate hard rock whenever they could and where it was unavoidable sometimes resorted to fire-setting. A fire was built against the rock face after mining had finished for the day and allowed to burn through the night. Fragmentation of the heated rock was increased by throwing water on to it. The rule about fire-setting only after the end of the day's work was important because in the confined mines the smoke was deadly. Fire-setting was a skilled technique and was used sparingly for that reason as well as because of the disruption caused by the smoke and the danger from splintering rock.
16th-century technical change
After a mid-16th-century slump the industry recovered, new mines were opened on Middleton Moor, and production increased, a recovery mainly due to technical developments. While traditional extraction methods had persisted there were vital changes in the ways in which ore was prepared for smelting and in the smelting process itself.
Bole smelting
The traditional smelter was a bole, a large fire built on a hill and relying on wind power. It functioned best with large pieces of rich ore known as bing and could not deal with anything small enough to pass through a half-inch mesh riddle. The bole smelter therefore resulted in large amounts of ore accumulating on waste heaps. It required two days of strong wind and could only function when the conditions were favourable.
Smelting mills
In the late 16th century wind power was abandoned and the smelting blast was provided by a bellows driven first by foot, to an ore hearth, and later by water-power in a smelting mill. The mills were fuelled by "white coal", which was in fact kiln-dried branch wood. Wood was preferred to charcoal for the main furnace, which smelted ore from the mines, as charcoal generated more heat than this furnace required. Drying the wood eliminated smoke, which would have made it difficult for the smelters to keep the necessary close observation of the process. Charcoal was used in a second furnace, which resmelted the slag from the first, and required greater heat. Draught for the furnaces came from two large bellows driven by the water wheels. Lead ore of all grades was first broken or ground again into finer particles and rewashed to produce very pure ore for the furnace. These smelters could deal with much finer particles of ore and new techniques were introduced to provide them.
Dressing
Before a miner could sell his ore he had to dress it. Dressing was the process of extracting the ore from the rock in which it was embedded and washing it, a further refining process. In the days of bole smelting the ore was roughly washed clean of waste minerals and dirt before being riddled for bing ore. The ore for the new smelters was smashed, or crushed, into pieces about the size of peas. This was done by hand, using a hammer called a bucker or, in larger mines, on a crushing circle, where a horse dragged a roller round a paved circle on which the ore was placed. Crushed ore was washed either by running water over it in a sloping trough called a buddle or by placing it in a sieve fine enough to prevent any ore particles passing through. The sieve was then plunged several times into a trough. In each case the object was to allow the heavier, lead-rich, particles to sink, enabling those containing lighter, unwanted minerals to be skimmed off the top and removed. These processes were then repeated at the smelter. By the 17th century new mines were being opened, shafts driven deeper, and old waste heaps were yielding new supplies for the smelters.
Mining customs
Everything about the old lead industry, from the mining of ore to its sale, stemmed from the ancient claim of the monarch to all mineral rights. The whole structure was designed to enable the Duchy of Lancaster, a royal possession, to collect the king's royalties and, since these were farmed out, the miners paid them to the king's farmer. By the 17th century the local holder of the mineral rights was also the barmaster, who ran the industry, helped by deputies responsible for the liberties, and by the miners' juries of the Barmote Court. The lead industry is long gone, but its traditions are still maintained and the barmaster and the jury still meet in the Moot Hall in Wirksworth.
It was the royal possession of the mineral rights and the royal wish to encourage lead mining, that dictated the two characteristic features of so-called "free mining". Any man who could demonstrate to the barmaster that he had discovered a significant amount of ore was allowed to open a mine and retain the title to it as long as he continued to work it, and, secondly, mining took precedence over land ownership. No land owner or farmer could interfere with lead mining, though there were many attempts to limit its damage. In 1620 the Duchy of Lancaster's tenants at Brassington complained that lead mining was poisoning their cattle. In 1663 the Brassington manor court forbade miners from taking water from the village well to wash ore, on pain of a fine of 1 shilling, and in 1670 imposed fines of 3/4d on miners who left shafts uncovered or raised heaps of soil and waste minerals against fences, allowing cattle to climb over them. But the customs raised the possibility of ordinary families making a living independently of farmers or other employers and in the regular conflict between miners and landowners in the Wirksworth area the miners usually managed to hang on to them, though they did lose some of their fights.
King's farmers and chief barmasters
The coveted and valuable farm of the Duchy of Lancaster's right to the lead mine duties, coupled as it was with the office of chief barmaster, endowed its owner with both a considerable income and authority over the running of the industry. It was always resold at a much higher price than that charged by the Duchy, which was £110 plus annual payments of £72 for the duties and £1-6-8d for the barmastership.
Chief barmasters and the 24
At dinner in Wirksworth after meetings of the 17th-century Barmote Court, the landlord of the inn had three tables for those attending the Court. There was the "24 table", where the members of the 24-man jury sat, and where he charged 8d per head, "the barmasters' table", at 10d a head, and a table where "gentlemen's dinners" cost 1 shilling each. The gentlemen drank sack or claret with their dinner; the men were served with beer. The bill was paid by the king's farmer and chief barmaster. There were usually about a dozen gentlemen, some of whom were members of the jury, while others were there to present a case to the Court. Also among the gentlemen were the steward of the court, who was a lawyer and who conducted the sessions. When the chief barmaster for the Wapentake, always a man of wealth and rank, was a local gentleman such as Sir John Gell of Hopton or his son John, the 2nd baronet, he often attended the Court himself. If the current chief barmaster was an absentee member of the gentry or nobility he relied on his deputy barmasters.
In addition to helping the barmasters to carry out their duties the 24 jurors brought practical experience to bear when the Barmote Court was adjudicating in disputes and trials. The main requirement of the jurymen was that they should be knowledgeable in mining matters and they included both working miners and, when it was thought necessary, local gentry.
Deputy barmasters
The deputy barmasters whom the chief barmaster appointed were experienced local men. Some of them were yeoman farmer/miners and others local gentlemen. The deputy barmasters actually ran the system. It was they who initiated much of the business of the Court. It was they, in administering the rules, who determined whether a miner should have a particular mine or whether another should lose one. Their duties required them to be able to read, write and keep account of granting and removing title to mines and of ore production and the duties levied on it. As ore was brought from a mine, it was measured by the dish and the barmaster collected each 13th dish, a royalty or duty known as lot. This was the barmaster's reckoning. A further duty of sixpence a load (9 dishes) was paid by the merchants who bought the ore from the miners. This second duty was called cope.
Giving a mine
The barmaster or his deputy granted title in a mine, the usual name for which was grove or groove, on receipt of proof that it was viable. The proof was a standard container, a dish, filled with about 65 pounds (29 kilograms) of ore from the mine in question. Every dish was calibrated by the barmaster twice a year against a brass standard dish. The miner thus granted title to the mine was said to have freed it, either for old if a development in an existing mine, or for new in the case of a new discovery. He was given permission to work 2 meers of ground, known as founder meers, with no restriction on width or depth. A third meer was the king's, and other miners were each allowed to open a further meer, taker meers, along the vein. The miner marked each meer with his possessions or stows (a miniature version of the stows or windlass used to wind the ore from the shaft). A meer was 29 yards (27 m), in the Wirksworth Wapentake.
Since the course of a vein of lead was unpredictable, there were many disputes caused by one group of miners following a vein into another mine. There were occasions when possession was disputed by physical means.
Title-holding and record keeping
The deputy barmasters were responsible for settling disputes over ownership or of arresting or suspending operation of mines pending decisions of the Barmote Court. They could withdraw title whenever a mine was left unworked. They checked the mines regularly and used their knives to nick the stows at any neglected mine. After three nicks at weekly intervals title could be transferred to another miner. The mining rules required working shareholders in a mine to pull their weight. Any who did not were dispossessed, after a warning at the Barmote Court. Typical was this injunction from the court on 2 April 1630: "Wee saie that Thomas Taylor Henry Lowe and John Wooley shall come within tenn daies of warning given them by the Barrmaster and shall keepe Thomas Redforde companie at their groves in Home Rake or else to loose theire parte."
The deputy barmasters kept records of all changes of title and of the amounts of ore measured and the amounts of lot ore and cope collected at their regular reckonings at the mines. The lot and cope accounts involved quite complicated arithmetic. The information given included the period covered, the name of the miner or mine (occasionally both were given), the amount of ore mined, the number of dishes of lot ore received, the amount of ore sold to each buyer and the sum of money chargeable to each buyer for cope. Traditional methods were used at the reckonings; barmasters carried knives "to worke uppon a sticke the nomber of dishes of oare as they were measured which is usuall to be done at a reckoning". Many of their records have survived.
Accidents
In conjunction with the jury of 24 sitting at the Barmote Courts, the deputy barmasters adjudicated in disputes and enforced compliance with the customs of the mines. Their duties extended to acting as the coroner in the case of fatal accidents, where a specially summoned jury of twelve or thirteen local miners decided the cause of death. In an 18th-century example the Brassington barmaster, Edward Ashton, followed the rules after a death in Throstle Nest mine.
Wirksworth Wapentake March 26th 1761.
We, whose names are under written, being this day summoned by Mr. Edward Ashton, Bar-Master for the Liberty of Brassington, to a groove called by the name of Throstle Nest on Brassington Pasture; to enquire into the cause of the death of T.W. now lying before us; accordingly we have been down the shaft to the Foot thereof, and down one sump or turn to the foot thereof, and on a gate North-wardly about sixteen yards to the Forefield, where the deceased had been at work; and by the information of William Briddon who was working near him; it appears that a large stone fell upon him out of the roof, and it is our opinions the said stone was the cause of his death.
Structure of industry
The free mining arrangement under the rules of the Duchy of Lancaster was the normal state of affairs in the Duchy manor of Wirksworth. The Duchy's lessee of the mineral rights at the end of the 16th century, Gilbert, Earl of Shrewsbury, had established his right to the dues of lot and cope against attempts by local landowners to assert right to mines on their land. Shrewsbury's success embedded the old rules and facilitated free mining.
There was one independent area within the Wapentake, Griffe Grange, near Brassington, held by the Gell family of Hopton since Ralph Gell had leased it from Dale Abbey and bought it from the Crown Commissioners at the dissolution of the religious houses by Henry VIII. The Gells, however, ran their mines under similar rules to those in the Duchy, the only difference being that the miners paid their dues to them. Attempts by other landowners to establish the same rights as the Gells were largely unsuccessful. An example occurred at Elton, where the landowner, Francis Foljambe, prevented the application of Duchy rules, employing wage labourers in the Elton mines and seeking sanction for his action in the courts. The Duchy Court, however, issued an injunction against him in 1627, instructing him "to conveane or execute noe other suite or suites hereafter att the Comon Lawe ... concerning the lott and copp and lead mynes in Elton". This ruling was applied in all the Duchy liberties, though there was a renewal of opposition from landowners after the Restoration of 1660.
For historical reasons the structure of the industry was different in the High Peak where, mainly because of very long leases, there had been a blurring of the Duchy's authority, and the two largest landowners, the Manners and Cavendish families, maintained claims to mining rights and dues. The miners fought hard, physically and in the courts, to obtain the free mining rights enjoyed in the Wirksworth Wapentake. The Manners family met them head-on, refused all attempts to establish free mining, and employed miners as day labourers in their mines. Their Cavendish neighbours at Chatsworth, after a period of conflict, adopted the same pattern as the Gells at Griffe Grange, collecting the dues from mines run by Duchy of Lancaster rules.
The operation of the old rules and customs in the Wirksworth Wapentake did not prevent the development of a complicated structure there. The barmasters' ore accounts, identifying mines and/or proprietors, reveal a mixture of free mining, ownership of large mines by rich entrepreneurs and the rewashing of old spoil heaps. Where there was a rich source of ore and especially where access required dewatering, the mines were owned by venture capitalists employing miners either as contracted groups, who considered themselves as free miners negotiating a price for their work or, more rarely, as wage labourers. The barmasters' accounts for 1653 show that the ore from the Brassington, Middleton and Wirksworth liberties, all low producers at the time, consisted of small amounts mined by a large number of names. Clearly, in these liberties, at this time, it was the small-time miners, most of whom would have had other sources of income, usually farming, who were paying their dues and selling to the lead merchants and smelters. In a fourth liberty, Cromford, the picture was different. With the Dovegang dewatered by Vermuyden's Sough (see below), the output there dwarfed the combined output of the other three liberties, and 51% of it came from mines owned by the rich lead merchant Lionel Tynley. 88% came from four sources, while the rest was mined by 45 independent miners. Finally, 6,108 loads (about 1,527 tons), or 23% of the total ore sold in the four liberties, was won from old hillocks by so-called "cavers".
Pollution
Lead is poisonous to both plants and animals. For people the smelting processes are the most dangerous – the restored smelter at Spitewinter, near Chesterfield, stands a few yards from Belland Lane, belland being lead poisoning. The current owners of the smelter on the site of the former Mill Close mine at Darley Bridge have bought much of the adjoining land and turned arable and pasture into woodland, to avoid the danger to crops and animals.
The danger to plants and animals, particularly from washing or "buddling", has been known for centuries and the nuisance to the people of Brassington described above was typical of the conflict between farmers and miners. In the 1680s Sir John Gell II gave his opinion during such a dispute. "For buddling ... I have heard that miners have been indicted for it, and the freeholders and occupiers of land are much prejudiced by it. It sets the cattle upon the belland, which is destructive to the cattle and horses and often kills them."
In 1794 several groups of Wensley miners who had buddled mine waste in the river Derwent above and below Darley Bridge were brought to court, accused of polluting the river. Witnesses described the river as being muddied as far down-river as a mile below Cromford Bridge, and a Matlock publican claimed to have been prevented from his usual practice of using river water for his brewing by the state of the Derwent. He had had to sink a well to stay in business. Mining law was cited by both sides. The miners quoted the custom which allowed them to wash their ore, while plaintiffs replied with the law which stipulated that sludge from washing should be emptied into "some convenient place within their quarter cord (which is a space of seven yards and a quarter, or the fourth part of a meer, on each side of their vein)" to prevent pollution of the adjacent land. The miners, who had carted their ore to the river, as being easier than carting water to their mine – their mine was dry and there is a steep hill from Wensley to the Derwent – lost their case.
In addition to the mining law to prevent water pollution quoted in the Wensley case, often ignored by the miners, attempts to prevent pollution of farmland included tree planting to deter cattle from grazing near mining operations – there are many examples of trees planted on the lines of veins in the old mining areas as well as the recent afforestation at Darley Bridge. Smelting mills had chimneys to dissipate the fumes from the ore hearths. These were only partly successful as the mills were often sited in or near to settlements, which suffered from lead deposits from the chimneys. The mills also polluted the streams which powered their bellows. Cupolas, described below, conveyed their emissions via tunnels to chimneys, which were often a considerable distance from the smelter. The limited success achieved by these efforts is exemplified by the naming of Belland Lane.
Mine drainage
Until the 17th century mining had usually been abandoned when the work reached the water table. Efforts at draining lead mines by horse-powered pumps, or "engines", had little success. In the later years of the industry mines were successfully drained by hydraulic, steam, internal combustion and electric power, but the first successes were achieved by soughs, drainage tunnels driven into flooded veins to allow the water to run off. Dr Rieuwerts has provided a comprehensive gazetteer of the Derbyshire lead mining soughs. By lowering the water table and opening up large new deposits of lead ore, they transformed the industry.
The first sough, designed by Sir Cornelius Vermuyden, knighted for his work in draining the East Anglian fens, was driven over a twenty-year period from a point on Cromford Hill, between Cromford and Wirksworth, into an area called the Dovegang. When it was completed in 1652 there was an immediate jump in ore production in the area. Vermuyden's was followed by a succession of soughs which by the end of the century had drained enough of the mines in the Wirksworth Wapentake to cause a dramatic rise in production in the whole area. The most important were the Cromford Sough, which was over thirty years in driving, between 1662 and 1696, and was continued in the 18th century, and Hannage Sough, begun in 1693 and also continued into the next century. The Cromford Sough provided the power for Richard Arkwright's mills at Cromford, the first of which was built in 1771. Also among the important 17th century soughs were the Raventor, begun in 1655, Bates (1657–84), Lees (1664), and Baileycroft (1667–73). The Baileycroft Sough drained mines in Wirksworth. Those in the area just to the north of Wirksworth called the Gulf were drained by the Raventor and Lees Soughs. The Bates and Cromford Soughs drained mines on Cromford Moor – Bates Sough had reached the Dovegang by 1684. Hannage Sough drained the area to the east of Yokecliffe Rake, on the south of Wirksworth.
Drainage of the mines in the whole of the Wirksworth area was eventually accomplished by the Meerbrook Sough, begun at the level of the river Derwent in 1772, at a time when lead-mining ventures had become only intermittently profitable. The entrance to this sough is 10 feet (3.0 metres) wide and 8 feet (2.4 metres) high and has a keystone inscribed "FH 1772". FH was Francis Hurt of Alderwasley, smelter, lead mine shareholder, iron-master and the main shareholder in the sough. It still discharges 12 million imperial gallons (55,000 m3) to 20 million imperial gallons (91,000 m3) a day, and by the 1830s had so reduced the flow from the Cromford Sough that in 1846 Richard Arkwright's successor had to end production at the Cromford mills.
In other areas the Mill Close mines between Winster and Wensley, and the mines of Youlgreave were soughed.
Cupola smelting
The mills which had superseded the ancient bolehills in the late 16th century, a development described above, were themselves superseded in the 18th century by the gradual introduction of a new type of furnace known as the cupola.
The old mills had a number of disadvantages. Their characteristic overheating and dissemination of polluting fumes made it necessary to close the smelter down at the end of each day's work. The hearth burned out quickly and regular weekly repairs or rebuilding were necessary – between 24 June and 29 September 1657, for instance, thirteen new hearths were required at the Upper Mill in Wirksworth. Water-powered smelting mills were restricted to riverside sites and "white coal" fuel required a good supply of timber. By the 18th century timber supplies were running out and, where coke or coal was used because of timber shortages, impurities, particularly sulphur, were introduced into the lead. It was, finally, less efficient than the cupola.
The cupola was a reverberatory furnace. The fuel was burned in a combustion chamber at the side of the furnace, separate from the "charge" of ore, thus avoiding any contamination. This removed the disadvantage in using coal, which was far more plentiful than timber. The ore was loaded from a hopper into a concave furnace with a low, arched roof and a tall chimney or a flue at the opposite end from the combustion chamber. The flames and heated gases from the fuel were drawn across the charge by the draught from the chimney and beaten down by reverberation from the low roof. Slag on the surface of the molten lead was raked off and the lead itself poured into an iron pot at the side, before being ladled into moulds.
Several factors contributed to the cupola's greater efficiency than the smelting mill. Unlike the smelting mill, the cupola could be operated continuously. Since the air flow over the ore was less powerful than that from the bellows of the blast furnace fewer lead particles were blown away. Further lead was saved by the fact that since the fuel and the charge were separate none of the lead was lost into the ash. Since no water power was needed the cupola had a fourth theoretical advantage of being freed from the riverside location of the blast furnace, and able to be placed in the most convenient site for supply of ore and coal. However, the higher temperatures needed to melt the slag recovered from the primary melt required a water-powered furnace and, since slag mills tended to be placed next to the cupolas, most cupolas remained in riverside sites.
Many cupolas had long horizontal flues, which were introduced to trap pollutants before they could be discharged into the air. Since the pollutants included metal vapour, the sweepings of the flue could also be recovered for resmelting.
Closure
The Derbyshire lead industry declined after the late 18th century because of worked-out veins, increased production costs and the discovery of much cheaper foreign sources. The industry was protected from this foreign ore by import duty in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. A reduction in the duty in 1820 and its abolition in 1845 brought a steep rise in the volume of lead imported into England and accelerated the local industry's decline.
There were still bursts of high production, and indeed the output of certain mines during the 18th and 19th centuries exceeded anything achieved in the 17th century; over 2658 loads (about 641 tons or 651 metric tonnes) were mined at Brassington, traditionally an area of low output, in 1862. At a meeting of the Barmote Court in Wirksworth in 1862 one mine owner announced "that by perseverance for upwards of twenty years, they had at last found the long sought for treasure, which he hoped would be prosperous, and they should be able to continue employing, as they are at the present time, upwards of 100 men at one mine in Brassington". However, by 1901 the number of men employed in all the Derbyshire lead mines had fallen to 285 most of whom worked at the Mill Close Mine at Darley Bridge. Mill Close, the biggest lead mine in the country, took the Derbyshire lead industry into the 20th century, and just before its enforced closure in 1939, caused by flooding, employed about 600 men. The smelter at Mill Close, established in 1934, was bought in 1941 by H J Enthoven and Sons, a London-based lead producer, and still operates.

Desay Maru Jhyā (Nepali: देशय् मरू झ्या) is a traditional wooden window in Kathmandu, which is celebrated for its uniqueness. The name means "window without equal in the country" in Nepal Bhasa. The window is set into the facade of a residential house in central Kathmandu.
Desay Maru Jhyā is a specimen of the woodcarving heritage of the Newar people of Nepal which goes back more than a thousand years. Newar architecture is characterised by artistic windows and doors set into bare brick walls. The intricate carvings mostly depict religious motifs, ritual objects, mythical beasts and birds. The level of design and carving of the Newar window reached its peak in the mid-18th century. They are found on palaces, private residences and sacred houses across Nepal Mandala.
Desay Maru Jhyā is famed for being the only one of its kind. While most traditional windows are bay windows carved with elaborate details, Desay Maru Jhya is a latticed window with multiple frames. Its design looks like the bellows in an old folding camera.
The unique window is set into a house at Naradevi, a street to the north of Kathmandu Durbar Square, the old royal palace complex. The street forms part of the ceremonial circuit in the historic section of Kathmandu through which chariot processions and festival parades pass. The window is a tourist attraction and is part of the itinerary on sightseeing tours of the city.
National treasure
Desay Maru Jhyā is more than a century old and has been declared a national treasure. In 1978, the Postal Service Department of the Nepal government issued a postage stamp depicting the window.

In the iron and steel industry, direct reduction is a set of processes for obtaining iron from iron ore, by reducing iron oxides without melting the metal. The resulting product is pre-reduced iron ore.
Historically, direct reduction was used to obtain a mix of iron and slag called a bloom in a bloomery. At the beginning of the 20th century, this process was abandoned in favor of the blast furnace, which produces iron in two stages (reduction-melting to produce cast iron, followed by refining in a converter).
However, various processes were developed in the course of the 20th century and, since the 1970s, the production of pre-reduced iron ore has undergone remarkable industrial development, notably with the rise of the Midrex process. Designed to replace the blast furnace, these processes have so far only proved profitable in certain economic contexts, which still limits this sector to less than 5% of world steel production.
History
Bloomery
Historically, the reduction of iron ore without smelting is the oldest process for obtaining steel. Low-temperature furnaces, unable to reach the melting temperatures of iron alloys, produce a bloom, a heterogeneous agglomerate of metallic iron more or less impregnated with carbon, gangue, and charcoal. This process was gradually succeeded, from the 1st century in China and the 13th century in Europe, by the blast furnace, which simultaneously reduces and melts iron.
Elaborate low furnaces, such as the tatara or the Catalan forge, survived until the early 19th century. Compared with the indirect process (reduction-melting in the blast furnace, followed by cast-iron refining), these processes only survived when they enjoyed at least one of the following two advantages:
ability to process ores that are incompatible with blast furnaces (such as iron sands that clog blast furnaces, or ores that generate slag that is too pasty to be drained);
a more "reasonable" size than that of giant plants and their constraints (ore and capital requirements, production to sell off, etc.).
Modern direct reduction
More advanced direct reduction processes were developed at the beginning of the 20th century, when it became possible to smelt pre-reduced ores using the Martin-Siemens process or the electric arc furnace. Based on this technical and economic model, a number of processes were industrialized before World War II (the Krupp-Renn process adopted by the Shōwa Steel Works, the Chenot process, etc.). They remained confidential, however, and their profitability was generally debated.
Modern direct reduction processes, based on the use of natural gas instead of coal, were studied intensively in the 1950s. On December 5, 1957, the Mexican company Hylsa started up the first industrial production unit of this type in Monterrey, with the pre-reduced ore obtained destined for smelting in an electric arc furnace. As the production of pre-reduced ore with natural gas was economically viable, several plants were built in the late 1960s. As a cheap supply of natural gas was essential to their profitability, most plants were located in countries with gas deposits, in Latin America (where many were developed) and in the Middle East.
In 1970, worldwide production of pre-reduced iron ore reached 790,000 tonnes. The processes then in operation were the HYL process (680,000 tonnes produced), an SL/RN unit, a Purofer unit, and the first plant to use the Midrex process.
Although profitable and innovative, the processes invented did not ultimately prove to be a technological revolution capable of supplanting the traditional blast furnace-based process. However, the quantity of steel produced from pre-reduced materials grew steadily, outstripping world steel production:
in 1975, NML played a significant role in developing a ‘Direct Reduction Technology’ for producing sponge iron with solid fuel like non-metallurgical coal. This formed the basis of the first commercial sponge iron plant of India.
in 1976, installations in service totalled less than 5 Mt;
in 1985, annual production was 11 Mt for an installed capacity of around 20 Mt, the difference being explained by fluctuations in energy costs;
in 1991, production reached 20 Mt.
in 1995, worldwide production of prereducts passed the 30 Mt mark for the first time.
In 2010, 70 Mt were produced, 14% from HYL processes and 60% from the Midrex process. The latter accounts for most of the growth in natural gas-fired production of pre-reduced products, although since 2005 coal-fired processes have been making a strong comeback, mainly in India.
Packaging of pre-reduced iron ore is evenly divided between sponge iron and briquettes. Sponges are a highly porous metallic product, close to the original ore but highly pyrophoric, which limits their transport. They are therefore often subjected to hot compaction, which improves both product density and handling safety. In 2012, 45% of prereducts were transformed into briquettes in this way.
Chemical reactions
Iron oxide reduction
Iron oxides are reduced in the following sequence:
Fe2O3 → Fe3O4 → FeO → Fe
hematite → magnetite → wustite → iron
Each transition from one oxide to the next is due to two simultaneous high-temperature reduction reactions by carbon monoxide CO or dihydrogen H2:
These temperatures differ from those predicted by the Ellingham diagram. In reality, there is a coupling between carbon monoxide reduction and dihydrogen, so that these reactions work together, with hydrogen significantly improving the efficiency of CO reduction.
Reducing gas production
Coal-fired processes
In coal-fired processes, part of the fuel is first burnt to heat the charge. The product of this combustion is CO2. When the temperature reaches 1,000 °C, the CO2 reacts with the unburned carbon to create CO:
CO2 + C ⇌ 2 CO when T > 1 000 °C (Boudouard reaction)
The production of H2 cannot be achieved by the thermal decomposition of water, as the temperatures involved are too low. Hydrogen is in fact produced along with carbon monoxide by the reaction:
H2O + C → H2 + CO when T > 1 000 °C
These two reducing gas production reactions, which consume 172.45 and 131.4 kJ/mol respectively, are highly endothermic and operate by limiting charge heating.
Natural gas processes
The reducing atmosphere, rich in CO and H2, can be created from the high-temperature cracking of natural gas at around 1100-1150 °C, in the presence of oxidized gases (H2O and CO2) from ore reduction reactors.
CH4 + CO2 → 2 CO + H2
CH4 + H2O → CO + 3 H2
The system that generates the reducing gases is called a "reformer". In the Midrex process, it consists of tubes heated by the combustion of a portion (around a third) of the gas from the reactor.
Procedures
Plants for the production of pre-reduced iron ore are known as direct reduction plants. The principle involves exposing iron ore to the reducing action of a high-temperature gas (around 1000 °C). This gas is composed of carbon monoxide and dihydrogen, the proportions of which depend on the production process.
Generally speaking, there are two main types of processes:
processes where the reducing gas is obtained from natural gas. In this case, the ore is reduced in tanks;
processes where the reducing gas is obtained from coal. The reactor is generally an inclined rotary kiln, similar to those used in cement plants, in which coal is mixed with limestone and ore, then heated.
Another way of classifying processes is to distinguish between those where the reducing gases are produced in specific facilities separate from the reduction reactor - which characterizes most processes using natural gas - and those where the gases are produced inside the fusion reactor: coal-fired processes generally fall into this category. However, many "gas-fired" processes can be fed by gasification units producing a reducing gas from coal.
In addition, since the melting stage is necessary to obtain alloys, reduction-melting processes have been developed which, like blast furnaces, produce a more or less carburized liquid metal. Finally, many more or less experimental processes have been developed.
Tank processes
In these processes, iron ore is brought into contact with reducing gases produced and heated by a separate plant in a closed enclosure. As a result, these processes are naturally suited to the use of natural gas.
Cyclic processes
In these processes, the ore is fed into a tank, where it remains until it is completely reduced. The vessel is then emptied of its pre-reduced ore, and filled with another charge of untreated ore. These processes can therefore be easily extrapolated from laboratory experiments. What's more, their principle, based on batch production, facilitates process control.
Natural gas processes
In natural gas cyclic processes, a unit produces hot reducing gas, which is injected into the reactor. To ensure continuous operation of the unit converting natural gas into reducing gas, several tanks are operated in parallel and with a time lag.
The best-known of this type is HYL I and its improved variant, HYL II. This is the oldest industrial direct gas reduction process, developed in Mexico in 1957 by the Hylsa company.
Retorts
These are exclusively coal-fired processes, with the reducing gases generated inside the reduction vessel. The ore is charged with coal into a closed container. This is then heated until the oxygen present in the ore combines with the carbon before being discharged, mainly in the form of CO or CO2. This production of gas by heating a solid material means that the reactor belongs to the retort category.
The principle is an ancient one: in northern China, the shortage of charcoal led to the development of processes using hard coal before the 4th century. To avoid any contact between iron and sulfur, the brittle element provided by coal, China developed a process that involved placing iron ore in batteries of elongated tubular crucibles and covering them with a mass of coal, which was then burned. This process survived into the 20th century.
More recently, other historic processes have come to the fore, such as that of Adrien Chenot, operational in the 1850s in a number of plants in France and Spain. Successive improvements by Blair, Yutes, Renton, and Verdié are not significant. Among the processes developed is the HOGANAS process, perfected in 1908. Three small units are still operational (as of 2010). Not very productive, it is limited to the production of powdered iron, but as it is slow and operates in closed retorts, it easily achieves the purities required by powder metallurgy.
Other retort processes were developed, such as KINGLOR-METOR, perfected in 1973. Two small units were built in 1978 (closed) and 1981 (probably closed).
Continuous processes
Based on the principle of counter-current piston flow, these processes are the closest to the blast furnace or, more accurately, the stückofen. Hot reducing gases are obtained from natural gas, in a separate unit from the shaft, and injected at the bottom of the shaft, while the ore is charged at the top. The pre-reduced materials are extracted hot, but in solid form, from the bottom of the shaft. This similarity to a blast furnace without its crucible made it one of the first processes explored by metallurgists, but the failures of the German Gurlt in 1857, and the French Eugène Chenot (son of Adrien) around 1862, led to the conclusion that "the reduction of iron ore [...] is therefore [not] possible in large quantities by gas alone".
Developed in the 1970s, the Midrex process is the best example of a continuous direct reduction process. As much a technical success as a commercial one, since 1980 it has accounted for around two-thirds of the world's production of pre-reduced materials. Its similarity to the blast furnace means that it shares some of its advantages, such as high production capacity, and some disadvantages, such as the relative difficulty of controlling several simultaneous reactions in a single reactor (since the nature of the product changes considerably as it travels through the vessel). The strategy of selling turnkey units, combined with a cautious increase in production capacity, has given this process good financial and technical visibility... compared with the often dashed hopes of competing processes.
Its direct competitor, the HYL III process, is the result of a research effort by the Tenova Group (de), heir to the Mexican Hylsa pioneers. Accounting for almost 20% of pre-reduced product production, it differs from the Midrex process in that it features an in-house reforming unit for the production of reducing gases.
Other processes have been developed based on this continuous reactor principle. Some, like ULCORED, are still at the study stage. Most have only been developed in a single country, or by a single company. Others were failures, such as the NSC process, of which a single plant was built in 1984 and converted to HYL III in 1993, ARMCO (a single unit commissioned in 1963 and shut down in 1982) or PUROFER (3 units operational from 1970 to 1979, small-scale production resumed in 1988).
Coal-fired processes are variants of natural gas processes, where the gas can be synthesized from coal in an additional unit. Among these variants, the MxCol, of which one commercial unit in Angul commissioned by Jindal Steel and Power has been operational since 2014, is a Midrex fed by a coal gasification unit. Technically mature but more complex, they are at a disadvantage compared with equivalent gas-fired processes, which require slightly less investment.
Fluidized beds
Given that direct reduction is a chemical exchange between gas and solid, the fluidization of ore by reducing gases is an attractive line of research. However, the changing nature of the constituents, combined with the high temperature and the difficulty of controlling the fluidization phenomenon, make its adoption singularly difficult.
Many processes have been developed on this principle. Some have been technical failures, such as the HIB (a single plant commissioned in 1972, converted to the Midrex in 1981) or economic failures, such as the FIOR process (a single plant commissioned in 1976, mothballed since 2001, the forerunner of FINMET).
Developed in 1991 from the FIOR process, the FINMET process seems more mature, but its expansion has not materialized (two plants were built, and only one was in operation as of 2014). The CIRCORED process, also recent, is similarly stagnant (just one plant built, commissioned in 1999, mothballed in 2012), despite its adaptability to coal (CIRCOFER process, no industrial production).
Rotating furnace processes
Rotation of the reduction furnace may be a design choice intended to circulate the ore through the furnace. It can also play an active part in the chemical reaction by ensuring mixing between the reactants present. Rotary hearth processes, where the ore rests on a fixed bed and travels through a tunnel, fall into the first category. Rotary kiln processes, where the ore is mixed with coal at high temperature, constitute the second category.
Rotary hearth
These processes consist of an annular furnace in which iron ore mixed with coal is circulated. Hot reducing gases flow over, and sometimes through, the charge. The ore is deposited on a tray, or carts, rotating slowly in the furnace. After one rotation, the ore is reduced; it is then discharged and replaced by oxidized ore.
A number of processes have been developed based on this principle. In the 1970s-1980s, the INMETCO process demonstrated only the validity of the idea, with no industrial application. The MAUMEE (or DryIron) process came to fruition in the US with the construction of two small industrial units in the 1990s. Similarly, in Europe, a consortium of Benelux steelmakers developed the COMET process in the laboratory from 1996 to 1998. Despite the consortium's withdrawal from the research program in 1998, a single industrial demonstrator was extrapolated from it, the SIDCOMET, which was discontinued in 2002. RedIron, whose only operational unit was inaugurated in Italy in 2010, also benefits from this research. Japan has adopted the FASTMET process, with the commissioning of three units dedicated to the recovery of iron-rich powders, and is proposing an improved version, the ITmk3 process, with one unit in operation in the United States.
This non-exhaustive list shows that, despite the keen interest shown by steelmakers in developed countries during the 1990s, none of these processes met with commercial success.
Rotary drums
These processes involve high-temperature blending of iron ore and coal powder, with a little limestone to reduce the acidity of the ore. Processes such as Carl Wilhelm Siemens', based on the use of a short drum, first appeared at the end of the 19th century. The tool used then evolved into a long tubular rotary kiln, inspired by those used in cement works, as in the Basset process, developed in the 1930s.
A process of historic importance is the Krupp-Renn. Developed in the 1930s, there were as many as 38 furnaces in 1945 which, although they only had a capacity of 1 Mt/year at the time, were installed all over the world. This process was improved and inspired the German Krupp-CODIR furnaces and the Japanese Kawasaki and Koho processes. Both Japanese processes integrate a pelletizing unit for steel by-products upstream of the rotary furnaces. Two units of each process were built between 1968 (Kawasaki) and 1975 (Koho).
The ACCAR process, developed in the late 1960s and used confidentially until 1987, uses a mixture of 80% coal and 20% oil or gas: the hydrocarbons, although more expensive, enrich the reducing gas with hydrogen. The German Krupp-CODIR process, operational since 1974, has had little more success: only three units have been commissioned. Finally, Indian steelmakers are behind the SIIL, Popurri, Jindal, TDR and OSIL processes, which are simply variants developed to meet specific technical and economic constraints.
Other processes, built on the same principle, failed to develop, such as the Strategic-Udy, consisting of a single plant commissioned in 1963 and shut down in 1964.
The SL/RN process, developed in 1964, dominated coal-fired processes in 2013. In 1997, it accounted for 45% of pre-reduced coal production. In 2012, however, production capacity for this process had fallen to just 1.8 Mt/year, out of a total of 17.06 Mt attributed to coal-fired processes.
Reduction-melting processes
As the smelting stage is necessary to obtain alloys and shape the product, direct reduction processes are frequently combined with downstream smelting facilities.
Most pre-reduced iron ore is smelted in electric furnaces: in 2003, 49 of the 50 Mt produced went into electric furnaces. Process integration is generally highly advanced, to take advantage of the high temperature (over 600 °C) of the prereduct from the direct reduction reactor.
One idea is to carry out the entire reduction-melting process in the arc furnace installed downstream of the reduction plant. Several plasma processes operating above 1530 °C have been devised and sometimes tested. Furnaces can be either non-transferred arc (Plasmasmelt, Plasmared) or transferred arc (ELRED, EPP, SSP, The Toronto System, falling plasma film reactor). All these processes share the electric furnace's advantage of low investment cost, and its disadvantage of using an expensive energy source. In the case of direct reduction, this disadvantage is outweighed by the fact that a great deal of heat is required, both for the reduction process and because of the gangue to be melted.
An alternative to the electric furnace is to melt the pre-reduction with a fuel. The cupola furnace is ideally suited to this task, but since one reason for the existence of direct reduction processes is the non-use of coke, other melting furnaces have emerged. The COREX process, in operation since 1987, consists of a direct-reduction shaft reactor feeding a blast furnace crucible, in which the pre-reduced ore is brought to a liquid smelting state, consuming only coal. This process also produces a hot reducing gas, which can be valorized in a Midrex-type unit. An equivalent to COREX, based on the FINMET fluidized bed instead of the Midrex vessel, is the Korean FINEX process (a contraction of FINMET and COREX). Both processes are in industrial operation at several plants around the world.
Last but not least, a number of reduction-melting furnaces in the same reactor have been studied, but have not yet led to industrial development. For example, the ISARNA process and its derivative HISARNA (a combination of the ISARNA and HISMELT processes), is a cyclonic reactor that performs melting before reduction. These processes have culminated in an industrial demonstrator tested in the Netherlands since 2011. Similarly, Japanese steelmakers joined forces in the 1990s to develop the DIOS process which, like many reduction-fusion processes, is similar to oxygen converters. The TECNORED process, studied in Brazil, also performs reduction-melting in the same vessel, but is more akin to a blast furnace modified to adapt to any type of solid fuel. Of all the processes of this type that have been developed, a single ISASMELT-type industrial unit built in Australia, with a capacity of 0.8 Mt/year, operated from 2005 to 2008 before being dismantled and shipped to China, where it was restarted in 2016.
Economic importance
Controlling capital and material requirements
In the US, where the Midrex process was first developed, direct reduction was seen in the 1960s as a way of breathing new life into electric steelmaking. The techno-economic model of the mini-mill, based on flexibility and reduced plant size, was threatened by a shortage of scrap metal, and a consequent rise in its price. With the same shortage affecting metallurgical coke, a return to the blast furnace route did not seem an attractive solution.
Direct reduction is theoretically well-suited to the use of ores that are less compatible with blast furnaces (such as fine ores that clog furnaces), which are less expensive. It also requires less capital, making it a viable alternative to the two tried-and-tested methods of electric furnaces and blast furnaces.
The comparative table shows that the diversity of processes is also justified by the need for quality materials. The coking plant that feeds a battery of blast furnaces is just as expensive as the blast furnace and requires a specific quality of coal. Conversely, many direct-reduction processes are disadvantaged by the costly transformation of ore into pellets: these cost on average 70% more than raw ore. Finally, gas requirements can significantly increase investment costs: gas produced by a COREX is remarkably well-suited to feeding a Midrex unit, but the attraction of the low investment then fades.
The benefits of direct fuel reduction
Although gas handling and processing are far more economical than converting coal into coke (not to mention the associated constraints, such as bulk handling, high sensitivity of coking plants to production fluctuations, environmental impact, etc.), replacing coke with natural gas only makes direct reduction attractive to steelmakers with cheap gas resources. This point is essential, as European steelmakers pointed out in 1998:"There's no secret: to be competitive, direct reduction requires natural gas at $2 per gigajoule, half the European price."
- L'Usine nouvelle, September 1998, La réduction directe passe au charbon.This explains the development of certain reduction-melting processes which, because of the high temperatures involved, have a surplus of reducing gas. Reduction-melting processes such as the COREX, capable of feeding an ancillary Midrex direct reduction unit, or the Tecnored, are justified by their ability to produce CO-rich gas despite their higher investment cost. In addition, coke oven gas is an essential co-product in the energy strategy of a steel complex: the absence of a coke oven must therefore be compensated for by higher natural gas consumption for downstream tools, notably hot rolling and annealing furnaces.
The worldwide distribution of direct reduction plants is therefore directly correlated with the availability of natural gas and ore. In 2007, the breakdown was as follows:
natural gas processes are concentrated in Latin America (where many have already been developed) and the Middle East;
coal-fired processes are remarkably successful in India, maintaining the proportion of steel produced by direct reduction despite the strong development of the Chinese steel industry.
China, a country with gigantic needs and a deficit of scrap metal, and Europe, lacking competitive ore and fuels, have never invested massively in these processes, remaining faithful to the blast furnace route. The United States, meanwhile, has always had a few units, but since 2012, the exploitation of shale gas has given a new impetus to natural gas processes.
However, because direct reduction uses much more hydrogen as a reducing agent than blast furnaces (which is very clear for natural gas processes), it produces much less CO2, a greenhouse gas. This advantage has motivated the development of ULCOS processes in developed countries, such as HISARNA, ULCORED, and others. The emergence of mature gas treatment technologies, such as pressure swing adsorption or amine gas treating, has also rekindled the interest of researchers. In addition to reducing CO2 emissions, pure hydrogen processes such as Hybrit are being actively studied with a view to decarbonizing the steel industry.

Direct reduction is the fraction of iron oxide reduction that occurs in a blast furnace due to the presence of coke carbon, while the remainder – indirect reduction – consists mainly of carbon monoxide from coke combustion.
It should also be noted that many non-ferrous oxides are reduced by this type of reaction in a blast furnace. This reaction is therefore essential to the operation of historical processes for the production of non-ferrous metals by non-steel blast furnaces (i.e. blast furnaces dedicated to the production of ferromanganese, ferrosilicon, etc., which have now disappeared).
Direct-reduction steelmaking processes that bring metal oxides into contact with carbon (typically those based on the use of hard coal or charcoal) also exploit this chemical reaction. In fact, at first glance, many of them seem to use only this reaction. Processes that historically competed with blast furnaces, such as the Catalan forge, have been assimilated into this reaction. But modern direct reduction processes are often based on the exclusive use of reducing gases: in this case, their name takes on the exact opposite meaning to that of the chemical reaction.
Definition
For blast furnaces, direct reduction corresponds to the reduction of oxides by the carbon in the coke. However, in practice, direct reduction only plays a significant role in the final stage of iron reduction in a blast furnace, by helping to reduce wustite (FeO) to iron. In this case, the chemical reaction can be trivially described as follows:
FeO + C → Fe + CO, consuming 155.15 kJ/mol
However, "in the solid state, there is virtually no reaction in the absence of gases, even between finely ground iron ore and coal powders. In other words, it seems certain that the reaction takes place via gases". This means that direct reduction most probably corresponds to the following chain of reactions:
FeO + CO → Fe + CO2, producing 17.45 kJ/mol (reduction by CO)
CO2 + C ⇌ 2 CO, consuming 172.45 kJ/mol (Boudouard reaction)
Roles
This reaction accounts for around half of the transformation of wustite, FeO, into iron, and removes 30% of the total oxygen supplied, mainly in the form of iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3. This mode of wustite reduction is highly endothermic, whereas the reduction of iron oxides by CO is slightly exothermic (+155.15 kJ/mol vs. –17.45 kJ/mol), so it is essential to keep it to a minimum.
This reaction concerns all the iron oxides present in a blast furnace, but also manganese(II) oxides (Mno), silica (SiO2), chromium, vanadium, and titanium, which are partially reduced in blast furnaces. These chemical reactions are described below:
MnO + C → Mn + CO, consuming 282.4 kJ/mol at 1400 °C (begins above 1000 °C and involves half the manganese present in the charge)
SiO2 + 2C → Si + 2CO, consuming 655.5 kJ/mol (begins above 1500 °C)
Chromium and vanadium behave like manganese, and titanium like silicon. As for the other iron oxides, their direct reduction is of negligible importance. This can be written as:
3Fe2O3 + C → 2Fe3O4 + CO, consuming 118.821 kJ/mol
Fe3O4 + C → 3FeO + CO, consuming 209.256 kJ/mol
In non-steel blast furnaces, dedicated to the production of ferroalloys, direct reduction is fundamental. For example, for ferronickel production, both direct reduction reactions are used:
NiO + C → Ni + CO, above 445 °C
FeO + C → Fe + CO, above 800 °C
So, although nickel reduces slightly more easily than iron, it cannot be reduced and cast independently of iron.

Disston Saw Works was an American company owned by Henry Disston that manufactured handsaws during the mid-19th to early 20th century in the Tacony neighborhood of Philadelphia. The company was initially named Keystone Saw Works and then Henry Disston & Sons, Inc. Two successor companies are said to still exist, Disston Precision is still operational in Philadelphia, and Disston Tools in Chicopee, Massachusetts.
History
The story of handsaws in the United States mirrors the technical and political development of steel. Sheffield, England, was the center of handsaw production during the 18th century and through most of the 19th century because of its fine steel and skilled craftsmen. England's political and economic lock on steel making in the colonies held American sawmakers at bay until well after the Revolutionary War. American steel producers could not compete until the Morrill Tariff leveled the playing field in 1861.
Henry Disston
This was the environment in which young Henry Disston (1819–1878) began his career as an American sawmaker in Philadelphia. He had emigrated from England in 1833 and started making saws and squares in 1840. In 1850, he founded the company that would become the largest sawmaker in the world: the Keystone Saw Works.
Some five years later, Disston built a furnace—perhaps the first melting plant for steel in America—and began producing the first crucible saw steel ever made in the United States. While his competitors were buying good steel from Britain, he was making his own, to his own specification, for his own needs. Disston subsequently constructed a special rolling mill exclusively for saw blades.
Over the following decade, the Disston company continued to grow, even while dedicating itself to the Union Army's war effort. In 1865, when his son Hamilton Disston rejoined the business after serving in the Civil War, Disston changed the company's name to Henry Disston & Son. Henry Disston and his sons set the standards for American sawmakers, both in terms of producing high-quality saws and developing innovative manufacturing techniques. Disston also started making files in 1865.
In September 1872, Henry Disston and two other men dug part of the foundation for what was to become the largest saw manufacturing facility in the world: Disston Saw Works. This was in the Tacony section of Philadelphia. Having previously moved his expanding business from near Second and Market Streets to Front and Laurel Streets, Disston sought to establish his business away from this cramped area. It took over 25 years to move the entire facility to Tacony. This Philadelphia neighborhood seems to have been the only company town in the United States established within an existing city. At its peak of operations, Disston Saw Works employed 8,000 people and the factory covered 300 acres.
Henry Disston was renowned for having one of the first industries that exhibited environmental responsibility, as well as a paternalistic view towards his employees. For example, he had thousands of homes built in Tacony for his workmen. Funds to purchase these homes were made available through a building and loan association set up by the Disston firm. Mr. Disston was ready to grant any assistance needed to see to it that his workers could purchase a home, even if advances needed to be made.
Other examples of Henry Disston's caring influence on the community was evident in everyday life. To meet employees' cultural needs, a hall and a library were built with Henry Disston agreeing to pay a fixed sum towards its maintenance. The Tacony Music Hall was erected in 1885, also with the assistance of Disston money.
Henry Disston had fallen ill by 1877 and never truly recovered; he suffered a stroke and died the next year. This came only one and a half years after seeing his products receive the highest honors at the great Philadelphia Centennial Exposition of 1876. His vision of a working class community and the completion of the transfer of his enormous saw plant was carried out by his wife and his sons.
Legacy
The company, known as Henry Disston and Sons, Inc by the early 20th century, cast the first crucible steel in the nation from an electric furnace in 1906. The firm's armor-plating building near Princeton Avenue and Milnor Street contributed tremendously to the World War II effort, building a volume of armor plates for steel tanks. (In the mid-1930s, Disston had provided the entire body for the Disston Tractor Tank, a fairly primitive light tank which was not a success.)
But the company's innovation and industriousness would not last forever. In 1955, with mounting cash-flow problems and waning interest on the family's part to run the firm, Henry Disston and Sons was sold to the H.K. Porter Company of Pittsburgh. Porter's Disston Division was sold in 1978 and became the Henry Disston Division of Sandvik Saw of Sweden. This division was then sold in 1984 to R.A.F. Industries of Philadelphia and became known as Disston Precision Incorporated, maker of specialized flat steel products. In 2013, R.A.F. Industries sold Disston Precision Inc. in a private sale. Although the company has ceased making Disston handsaws, the Disston brand name still exists in this firm.

A distress signal, also known as a distress call, is an internationally recognized means for obtaining help. Distress signals are communicated by transmitting radio signals, displaying a visually observable item or illumination, or making a sound audible from a distance.
A distress signal indicates that a person or group of people, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle is threatened by a serious or imminent danger and requires immediate assistance. Use of distress signals in other circumstances may be against local or international law. An urgency signal is available to request assistance in less critical situations.
For distress signalling to be the most effective, two parameters must be communicated:
Alert or notification of an emergency in progress
Position or location (or localization or pinpointing) of the party in distress.
For example, a single aerial flare alerts observers to the existence of a vessel in distress somewhere in the general direction of the flare sighting on the horizon but extinguishes within one minute or less. A hand-held flare burns for three minutes and can be used to localize or pinpoint more precisely the exact location or position of the party in trouble. An EPIRB both notifies or alerts authorities and at the same time provides position indication information.
Maritime
Distress signals at sea are defined in the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea and in the International Code of Signals. Mayday signals must only be used where there is grave and imminent danger to life. Otherwise, urgent signals such as pan-pan can be sent. Most jurisdictions have large penalties for false, unwarranted, or prank distress signals. The alerts are of utmost importance in ensuring the safety of life at sea, and are governed by international maritime law, specifically the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS).
Distress can be indicated by any of the following officially sanctioned methods:
Transmitting a spoken voice Mayday message by radio over very high frequency channel 16 (156.8 MHz) or medium frequency on 2182 kHz
Transmitting a digital distress signal by activating (or pressing) the distress button on a marine radio equipped with Digital Selective Calling (DSC) over VHF channel 70 or over another designated DSC frequency in the maritime MF and HF bands.
Transmitting a digital distress signal by activating (or pressing) the distress button (or key) on an Inmarsat-C satellite internet device
Sending the Morse code group SOS ( ▄ ▄ ▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄ ▄ ▄ ) by light flashes or sounds
Sending flashes from a daylight signalling mirror
Burning a red flare (either hand-held or aerial parachute flare)
Launching distress rockets
Emitting orange smoke from a canister
Showing flames on the vessel (as from a burning tar barrel, oil barrel, etc.)
Raising and lowering slowly and repeatedly both arms outstretched to each side
Making a continuous sound with any fog-signaling apparatus
Firing a gun or other explosive signal at intervals of about a minute
Flying the international maritime signal flags NC
Displaying a visual signal consisting of a square flag having above or below it a ball or anything resembling a ball (round or circular in appearance)
A floating man-overboard pole or dan buoy can be used to indicate that a person is in distress in the water and is ordinarily equipped with a yellow and red flag (international code of signals flag "O") and a flashing lamp or strobe light.
In North America, marine search and rescue agencies in Canada and the United States also recognize certain other distress signals:
Sea marker dye
White high-intensity strobe light flashing at 60 times per minute
Automated radio signals
In addition, distress can be signaled using automated radio signals such as a Search and Rescue Transponder (SART) which response to 9 GHz radar signal, or an Emergency Position-Indicating Radio Beacon (EPIRB) which operates in the 406 MHz radio frequency. EPIRB signals are received and processed by a constellation of satellites known as Cospas-Sarsat. Older EPIRBs that use 121.5 MHz are obsolete. Many regulators require vessels that proceed offshore to carry an EPIRB.
Many EPIRBs have an in-built Global Positioning System receiver. When activated these EPIRBs rapidly report the latitude and longitude of the emergency accurate to within 120 m (390 ft). The position of non-GPS EPIRBs is determined by the orbiting satellites, this can take ninety minutes to five hours after activation and is accurate to within 5 km (3.1 mi). Marine safety authorities recommend the use of GPS-equipped EPIRBs.
A miniaturized EPIRB capable of being carried in crew members' clothing is called a Personal Locator Beacon (PLB). Regulators do not view them as a substitute for a vessel's EPIRB. In situations with a high risk of "man overboard", such as open ocean yacht racing, PLBs may be required by the event's organizers. PLBs are also often carried during risky outdoor activities on the land.
EPIRBs and PLBs have a unique identification number (UIN or "HexID"). A purchaser should register their EPIRB or PLB with the national search and rescue authority; this is free in most jurisdictions. EPIRB registration allows the authority to alert searchers of the vessel's name, label, type, size, and paintwork; to promptly notify next-of-kin, and to quickly resolve inadvertent activations.
A DSC radio distress signal can include the position if the lat/long are manually keyed into the radio or if a GPS-derived position is passed electronically directly into the radio.
Mayday
A Mayday message consists of the word "mayday" spoken three times in succession, which is the distress signal, followed by the distress message, which should include:
Name of the vessel or ship in distress
Its position (actual, last known, or estimated expressed in lat/long or in distance/bearing from a specific location)
Nature of the vessel distress condition or situation (e.g. on fire, sinking, aground, taking on water, adrift in hazardous waters)
Number of persons at risk or to be rescued; grave injuries
Type of assistance needed or being sought
Any other details to facilitate resolution of the emergency such as actions being taken (e.g. abandoning ship, pumping flood water), estimated available time remaining afloat
Unusual or extraordinary appearance
When none of the above-described officially sanctioned signals are available, attention for assistance can be attracted by anything that appears unusual or out of the ordinary, such as a jib sail hoisted upside down.
During daylight hours when the sun is visible, a heliograph mirror can be used to flash bright, intense sunlight. Battery-powered laser lights the size of small flashlights (electric torches) are available for use in emergency signaling.
Inverted flags
For hundreds of years inverted national flags were commonly used as distress signals. However, for some countries' flags it is difficult (e.g., Spain, South Korea, United Kingdom) or impossible (e.g., Japan, Thailand, and Israel) to determine whether they are inverted. Other countries have flags that are inverses of each other; for example, the Polish flag is white on the top half and red on the bottom, while Indonesia's and Monaco's flags are the opposite—i.e., top half red, the bottom half white. A ship flying no flags may also be understood to be in distress. For one country, the Philippines, an inverted flag is a symbol of war rather than distress.
If any flag is available, distress may be indicated by tying a knot in it and then flying it upside-down, making it into a wheft.
Device loss and disposal
To avoid pointless searches some devices must be reported when lost. This particularly applies to EPIRBs, lifebuoys, rafts, and devices marked with the vessel's name and port.
Expired flares should not be set off, as this indicates distress. Rather, most port authorities offer disposal facilities for expired distress pyrotechnics. In some areas special training events are organized, where the flares can be used safely.
EPIRBs must not be disposed of into general waste as discarded EPIRBs often trigger at the waste disposal facility. In 2013, the majority of EPIRB activations investigated by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority were due to the incorrect disposal of obsolete 121.5 MHz EPIRB beacons.
Aviation
The civilian aircraft frequency for voice distress alerting is 121.5 MHz. Military aircraft use 243 MHz (which is a harmonic of 121.5 MHz, and therefore civilian beacons transmit on this frequency as well). Aircraft can also signal an emergency by setting one of several special transponder codes, such as 7700.
The COSPAS/SARSAT signal can be transmitted by an Electronic Locator Transmitter or ELT, which is similar to a marine EPIRB on the 406 MHz radiofrequency. (Marine EPIRBs are constructed to float, while an aviation ELT is constructed to be activated by a sharp deceleration and is sometimes referred to as a Crash Position Indicator or CPI).
A "triangular distress pattern" is a rarely used flight pattern flown by aircraft in distress but without radio communications. The standard pattern is a series of 120° turns.
Ground Air Emergency Codes
Ground-Air Emergency Codes are distress signals used by crashed pilots and military personnel to send signals from the ground to an aircraft.
Schwarzwald
The recognized mountain distress signals are based on groups of three, or six in the UK and the European Schwarzwald. A distress signal can be three fires or piles of rocks in a triangle, three blasts on a whistle, three shots from a firearm, or three flashes of light, in succession followed by a one-minute pause and repeated until a response is received. Three blasts or flashes is the appropriate response.
In the Schwarzwald, the recommended way to signal distress is the Schwarzwald distress signal: give six signals within a minute, then pause for a minute, repeating this until rescue arrives. A signal may be anything visual (waving clothes or lights, use of a signal mirror) or audible (shouts, whistles, etc.). The rescuers acknowledge with three signals per minute.
In practice, either signal pattern is likely to be recognized in most popular mountainous areas as nearby climbing teams are likely to include Europeans or North Americans.
To communicate with a helicopter in sight, raise both arms (forming the letter Y) to indicate "Yes" or "I need help", or stretch one arm up and one down (imitating the letter N) for "No" or "I do not need help". If semaphore flags are available, they can be used to communicate with rescuers.
Ground beacons
The COSPAS-SARSAT 406 MHz radiofrequency distress signal can be transmitted by hikers, backpackers, trekkers, mountaineers and other ground-based remote adventure seekers and personnel working in isolated backcountry areas using a small, portable Personal Locator Beacon or PLB.

A dovetail joint (also dovetail, or in Europe a swallowtail, culvertail or fantail joint) is a joinery technique most commonly used in woodworking joinery (carpentry), including furniture, cabinets, log buildings, and traditional timber framing. Noted for its resistance to being pulled apart, also known as tensile strength, the dovetail joint is commonly used to join the sides of a drawer to the front. A series of pins cut to extend from the end of one board interlock with a series of 'tails' cut into the end of another board. The pins and tails have a trapezoidal shape. Once glued, a wooden dovetail joint requires no mechanical fasteners.
History
The dovetail joint technique probably pre-dates written history. Some of the earliest known examples of the dovetail joint are in ancient Egyptian furniture entombed with mummies dating from First Dynasty, the tombs of Chinese emperors, and a stone pillar at the Vazhappally Maha Siva Temple in India. The dovetail design is an important method of distinguishing various periods of furniture.
The etymology of the name comes from the resemblance between the tenon or mortise of the joint to the shape of a dove's tail .
Methods
The dovetail joint is very strong because of the way the 'tails' and 'pins' are shaped. This makes it difficult to pull the joint apart and virtually impossible when glue is added. This type of joint is used in box constructions such as drawers, jewellery boxes, cabinets and other pieces of furniture where strength is required. It is a difficult joint to make manually, requiring skilled workmanship. There are different types of dovetail joints.
The angle of slope varies according to the wood used, purpose of joint and type of work. Typically the slope is 1:6 for softwoods, and a shallower 1:8 slope for hardwoods. Often a slope of 1:7 is used as a compromise. However, a different slope does not affect the strength of the joint in different types of wood.
Types of dovetails
Through dovetail
A 'through dovetail' (also known as 'plain dovetail') joint leaves the end grain of both boards visible when the joint is assembled. Through dovetails are common in carcass and box construction. Traditionally, the dovetails would have often been covered by a veneer. However, dovetails have become a signature of craftsmanship and are generally considered a feature, so they are rarely concealed in contemporary work. When used in drawer construction, a through (or blind, mitred, or lapped) dovetail joint is sometimes referred to as an "English dovetail."
Half-blind dovetail
Craftsmen use a 'half-blind dovetail' when they do not want the end grain visible from the front of the joint. The tails fit into mortises in the ends of the board that is the front of the item, hiding their ends.
Half-blind dovetails are commonly used to fasten drawer fronts to drawer sides. This is an alternative to the practice of attaching false fronts to drawers constructed using through dovetails.
Secret mitred dovetail
The 'secret mitred dovetail' joint (also called a 'mitred blind dovetail', 'full-blind dovetail', or 'full-blind mitred dovetail') is used in the highest class of cabinet and box work. It offers the strength found in the dovetail joint but is totally hidden from both outside faces by forming the outer edge to meet at a 45-degree angle while hiding the dovetails internally within the joint.
The mitred corner dovetail joint is very similar in design, but it has just a single dovetail and is used for picture frames and other similar joins.
Secret double-lapped dovetail
The secret double-lapped dovetail is similar to the secret mitred dovetail, but presents a very thin section of end grain on one edge of the joint. Used for carcass and box construction to hide the dovetails completely from view.
Sliding dovetail
The sliding dovetail is a method of joining two boards at right angles, where the intersection occurs within the field of one of the boards, that is not at the end. This joint provides the interlocking strength of a dovetail. Sliding dovetails are assembled by sliding the tail into the socket. It is common to slightly taper the socket, making it slightly tighter towards the rear of the joint, so that the two components can be slid together easily but the joint becomes tighter as the finished position is reached. Another method to implement a tapered sliding dovetail is to taper the tail instead of the socket. When used in drawer construction, a "stopped sliding dovetail" that does not extend across the full width of the board is sometimes referred to as a "French dovetail".
Used for:
Joining shelves to cabinet sides
Joining cabinet bottoms to sides
Joining horizontal partitions to shelves
Joining adjacent sections of expandable table frames
Joining drawer fronts to sides
Joining front rails of web frames to cabinet sides
Joining neck and body in violins and some guitars.
Non-woodworking dovetails
Dovetails are most commonly, but not exclusively, used in woodworking. Other areas of use are:
Dovetail slides, for example on a lathe, a milling machine or other machine tools.
Attaching turbine blades to the shaft in jet engines and other applications.
Clockmaking: dovetailing a new tooth, when replacing broken teeth in clock gears.
Masonry: dovetail construction is regarded a major step forward in the design of lighthouses meant for particularly dangerous areas; the Eddystone Lighthouse and Fastnet Lighthouse are examples of the durable quality of dovetail masonry.
3D printing: dovetail is commonly used to overcome physical object print size limitation of a 3D printer.
Aiming devices such as iron sights or telescopic sights on firearms and airguns may be affixed via a dovetail rail to the receiver or slide. 11mm or 3/8 is the most common measurement frequently used in airguns and rimfire rifles and pistols.

The dowel is a cylindrical shape made of wood, plastic, or metal. In its original manufactured form, a dowel is long and called a dowel rod, which are often cut into shorter dowel pins. Dowels are commonly used as structural reinforcements in cabinet making and in numerous other applications, including:
Furniture shelf supports
Moveable game pieces (i.e. pegs)
Hangers for items such as clothing, key rings, and tools
Wheel axles in toys
Detents in gymnastics grips
Supports for tiered wedding cakes
Wood dowel
Manufacturing process
The traditional tool for making dowels is a dowel plate, an iron
(or better, hardened tool steel) plate with a hole having the size of the desired dowel. To make a dowel, a piece of wood is split or whittled to a size slightly bigger than desired and then driven through the hole in the dowel plate. The sharp edges of the hole shear off the excess wood.
A second approach to cutting dowels is to rotate a piece of oversized stock past a fixed knife, or alternatively, to rotate the knife around the stock. Machines based on this principle emerged in the 19th century. Frequently, these are small bench-mounted tools.
For modest manufacturing volumes, wood dowels are typically manufactured on industrial dowel machines based on the same principles as the rotary cutters described above. Such machines may employ interchangeable cutting heads of varying diameters, thus enabling the machines to be quickly changed to manufacture different dowel diameters.
Typically, the mechanism is open-ended, with material guides at the machine's entry and exit to enable fabrication of continuous dowel rods of unlimited length. Since the 19th century, some of these dowel machines have had power feed mechanisms to move the stock past the cutting mechanism.
Application
When dowels are glued into blind holes, a very common case in dowel-based joinery, there must be a path for air and excess glue to escape when the dowel is pressed into place. If no provision is made to relieve the hydraulic pressure of air and glue, hammering the dowel home or clamping the joint can split the wood. An old solution to this problem is to plane a flat on the side of the dowel; some sources suggest planing the flat on the rough stock before the final shaping of the round dowel. Some dowel plates solve the problem by cutting a groove in the side of the dowel as it is forced through; this is done by a groove screw, a pointed screw intruding from the side into the dowel cutting opening.
When two pieces of wood are to be joined by dowels embedded in blind holes, there are numerous methods for aligning the holes. For example, pieces of shot may be placed between the wood pieces to produce indentations when the pieces are clamped together; after the clamp is released, the indentations indicate the center points for drilling.
History
The word dowel was used in Middle English; it appears in Wycliffe's Bible translation (circa 1382–1395) in a list of the parts of a wheel: "...and the spokis, and dowlis of tho wheelis..."

The Dowelmax is a loose tenon dowelling jig manufactured by the O.M.S. Tool company in Canada. The manufacturer claims that the small manufacturing tolerances of 0.026 millimetres (0.0010 in) for the aluminium, brass and steel components of the jig ensure accuracy and repeatability, but the precision manufacturing adds to the unit's cost.
The tool allows the placement of five dowels in one pass. A distance gauge bar provided with the jig allows accurate spacing between sets of dowels.
Joint strength
Tests by both the manufacturer, and Wood magazine (in 2007), claim to show that dowel joints made with the Dowelmax are stronger than most other woodworking joints tested. In addition, a 2011 review by Wood magazine rated Dowelmax as a superior dowel joinery tool, describing Dowelmax as "the best dowelling jig ever made".
Independent test
Hydraulic comparison strength testing by manufacturer

Drill bits are the cutting tools of drilling machines. They can be made in any size to order, but standards organizations have defined sets of sizes that are produced routinely by drill bit manufacturers and stocked by distributors.
In the U.S., fractional inch and gauge drill bit sizes are in common use. In nearly all other countries, metric drill bit sizes are most common, and all others are anachronisms or are reserved for dealing with designs from the US. The British Standards on replacing gauge size drill bits with metric sizes in the UK was first published in 1959.
A comprehensive table for metric, fractional wire and tapping sizes can be found at the drill and tap size chart.
Metric drill bit sizes
Metric drill bit sizes define the diameter of the bit in terms of standard metric lengths. Standards organizations define sets of sizes that are conventionally manufactured and stocked. For example, British Standard BS 328 defines 230 sizes from 0.2 mm to 25.0 mm.
From 0.2 through 0.98 mm, sizes are defined as follows, where N is an integer from 2 through 9:
N · 0.1 mm
N · 0.1 + 0.02 mm
N · 0.1 + 0.05 mm
N · 0.1 + 0.08 mm
From 1.0 through 2.95 mm, sizes are defined as follows, where N is an integer from 10 through 29:
N · 0.1 mm
N · 0.1 + 0.05 mm
From 3.0 through 13.9 mm, sizes are defined as follows, where N is an integer from 30 through 139:
N · 0.1 mm
From 14.0 through 25.0 mm, sizes are defined as follows, where M is an integer from 14 through 25:
M · 1 mm
M · 1 + 0.25 mm
M · 1 + 0.5 mm
M · 1 + 0.75 mm
In smaller sizes, bits are available in smaller diameter increments. This reflects both the smaller drilled hole diameter tolerance possible on smaller holes and the wishes of designers to have drill bit sizes available within at most 10% of an arbitrary hole size.
The price and availability of particular size bits does not change uniformly across the size range. Bits at size increments of 1 mm are most commonly available, and lowest price. Sets of bits in 1 mm increments might be found on a market stall. In 0.5 mm increments, any hardware store. In 0.1 mm increments, any engineers' store. Sets are not commonly available in smaller size increments, except for drill bits below 1 mm diameter. Drill bits of the less routinely used sizes, such as 2.55 mm, would have to be ordered from a specialist drill bit supplier. This subsetting of standard sizes is in contrast to general practice with number gauge drill bits, where it is rare to find a set on the market which does not contain every gauge.
There are also Renard series sequences of preferred metric drill bits:
R5 (factor 1.58) : M2.5, M4, M6, M10, M16, M24
R10 (factor 1.26): M3, M5, M8, M12, M20, M30
Metric dimensioning is routinely used for drill bits of all types, although the details of BS 328 apply only to twist drill bits. For example, a set of Forstner bits may contain 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30 mm diameter cutters.
Fractional-inch drill bit sizes
Fractional-inch drill bit sizes are still in common use in the United States and in any factory (around the globe) that makes inch-sized products for the U.S. market.
ANSI B94.11M-1979 sets size standards for jobber-length straight-shank twist drill bits from 1⁄64 inch through 1 inch in 1⁄64-inch increments. For Morse taper-shank drill bits, the standard continues in 1⁄64-inch increments up to 1+3⁄4 inches, then 1⁄32-inch increments up to 2+1⁄4 inches, 1⁄16-inch increments up to 3 inches, 1⁄8-inch increments up to 3+1⁄4 inches, and a single 1⁄4-inch increment to 3+1⁄2 inches. One aspect of this method of sizing is that the size increment between drill bits becomes larger as bit sizes get smaller: 100% for the step from 1⁄64 to 1⁄32, but a much smaller percentage between 1+47⁄64 and 1+3⁄4.
Drill bit sizes are written as irreducible fractions. So, instead of 78⁄64 inches, or 1+14⁄64 inches, the size is noted as 1+7⁄32 inches.
Below is a chart providing the decimal-fraction equivalents that are most relevant to fractional-inch drill bit sizes (that is, 0 to 1 by 64ths). (Decimal places for .25, .5, and .75 are shown to thousandths [.250, .500, .750], which is how machinists usually think about them ["two-fifty", "five hundred", "seven-fifty"]. Machinists generally truncate the decimals after thousandths; for example, a 27⁄64-inch drill bit may be referred to in shop-floor speech as a "four-twenty-one drill".)
Decimal-fraction equivalents
Number and letter gauge drill bit sizes
Number drill bit gauge sizes range from size 80 (the smallest) to size 1 (the largest) followed by letter gauge size A (the smallest) to size Z (the largest). Although the ASME B94.11M twist drill standard, for example, lists sizes as small as size 97, sizes smaller than 80 are rarely encountered in practice.
Number and letter sizes are commonly used for twist drill bits rather than other drill forms, as the range encompasses the sizes for which twist drill bits are most often used.
The gauge-to-diameter ratio is not defined by a formula; it is based on—but is not identical to—the Stubs Steel Wire Gauge, which originated in Britain during the 19th century. The accompanying graph illustrates the change in diameter with change in gauge, as well as the reduction in step size as the gauge size decreases. Each step along the horizontal axis is one gauge size.
Number and letter gauge drill bits are still in common use in the U.S. and to a lesser extent the UK, where they have largely been supplanted by metric sizes. Other countries that formerly used the number series have for the most part also abandoned these in favour of metric sizes.
Drill bit conversion table
Screw-machine-length drill
The shortest standard-length drills (that is, lowest length-to-diameter ratio) are screw-machine-length drills (sometimes abbreviated S/M). They are named for their use in screw machines. Their shorter flute length and shorter overall length compared to a standard jobber bit results in a more rigid drill bit, reducing deflection and breakage. They are rarely available in retail hardware stores or home centers.
Types of Drill Bits
Twist Drills: Most common, general-purpose drilling
Brad Point: Woodworking, precise holes
Spade Bits: Fast, rough holes in wood
Forstner Bits: Clean, flat-bottom holes
Step Bits: Multiple diameter holes
Jobber-length drill
Jobber-length drills are the most commonly found type of drill. The length of the flutes is between 9 and 14 times the diameter of the drill, depending on the drill size. So a 1/2 in (12.7 mm) diameter drill will be able to drill a hole 4+1/2 in (114.3 mm) deep, since it is 9 times the diameter in length. A 1/8 in (3.175 mm) diameter drill can drill a hole 1+5/8 in (41.275 mm) deep, since it is 13 times the diameter in flute length.
The term jobber refers to a wholesale distributor—a person or company that buys from manufacturers and sells to retailers. Manufacturers producing drill bits "for the trade" (as opposed to for specialized machining applications with particular length and design requirements) made ones of medium length suitable for a wide variety of jobs, because that was the type most desirable for general distribution. Thus, at the time that the name of jobber-length drill bits became common, it reflected the same concept that names like general-purpose and multipurpose reflect.
Aircraft-length drill
Extended-reach or long-series drills are commonly called aircraft-length from their original use in manufacturing riveted aluminum aircraft. For bits thicker than a minimum size such as 1⁄8 inch (3.2 mm), they are available in fixed lengths such as 6, 8, 12 or 18 inches (152, 203, 305 or 457 mm) rather than the progressive lengths of jobber drills.
The image shows a long-series drill compared to its diametric equivalents, all are 11⁄32 inch (8.7 mm) in diameter. The equivalent Morse taper drill shown in the middle is of the usual length for a taper-shank drill. The lower drill bit is the jobber or parallel shank equivalent.
Center drill bit sizes
Center drills are available with two different included angles; 60 degrees is the standard for drilling centre holes (for example for subsequent centre support in the lathe), but 90 degrees is also common and used when locating holes prior to drilling with twist drills. Center drills are made specifically for drilling lathe centers, but are often used as spotting drills because of their radial stiffness.
Spotting drill bit sizes
Spotting drills are available in a relatively small range of sizes, both metric and imperial, as their purpose is to provide a precise spot for guiding a standard twist drill. Commonly available sizes are 1/8", 1/4", 3/8", 1/2", 5/8", 3/4", 4 mm, 6 mm, 8 mm, 10 mm, 12 mm, 14 mm, 16 mm and 18 mm. The drills are most ordinarily available with either 90° or 120° included angle points.

Drilling is a cutting process where a drill bit is spun to cut a hole of circular cross-section in solid materials. The drill bit is usually a rotary cutting tool, often multi-point. The bit is pressed against the work-piece and rotated at rates from hundreds to thousands of revolutions per minute. This forces the cutting edge against the work-piece, cutting off chips (swarf) from the hole as it is drilled.
In rock drilling, the hole is usually not made through a circular cutting motion, though the bit is usually rotated. Instead, the hole is usually made by hammering a drill bit into the hole with quickly repeated short movements. The hammering action can be performed from outside the hole (top-hammer drill) or within the hole (down-the-hole drill, DTH). Drills used for horizontal drilling are called drifter drills.
In rare cases, specially-shaped bits are used to cut holes of non-circular cross-section; a square cross-section is possible.
Process
Drilled holes are characterized by their sharp edge on the entrance side and the presence of burrs on the exit side (unless they have been removed). Also, the inside of the hole usually has helical feed marks.
Drilling may affect the mechanical properties of the workpiece by creating low residual stresses around the hole opening and a very thin layer of highly stressed and disturbed material on the newly formed surface. This causes the workpiece to become more susceptible to corrosion and crack propagation at the stressed surface.
A finish operation may be done to avoid these detrimental conditions.
For fluted drill bits, any chips are removed via the flutes. Chips may form long spirals or small flakes, depending on the material, and process parameters. The type of chips formed can be an indicator of the machinability of the material, with long chips suggesting good material machinability.
When possible drilled holes should be located perpendicular to the workpiece surface. This minimizes the drill bit's tendency to "walk", that is, to be deflected from the intended center-line of the bore, causing the hole to be misplaced. The higher the length-to-diameter ratio of the drill bit, the greater the tendency to walk. The tendency to walk is also preempted in various other ways, which include:
Establishing a centering mark or feature before drilling, such as by:
Casting, molding, or forging a mark into the workpiece
Center punching
Spot drilling (i.e., center drilling)
Spot facing, which is machining a certain area on a casting or forging to establish an accurately located face on an otherwise rough surface.
Constraining the position of the drill bit using a drill jig with drill bushings
Surface finish produced by drilling may range from 32 to 500 microinches. Finish cuts will generate surfaces near 32 microinches, and roughing will be near 500 microinches.
Cutting fluid is commonly used to cool the drill bit, increase tool life, increase speeds and feeds, increase the surface finish, and aid in ejecting chips. Application of these fluids is usually done by flooding the workpiece with coolant and lubricant or by applying a spray mist.
In deciding which drill(s) to use it is important to consider the task at hand and evaluate which drill would best accomplish the task. There are a variety of drill styles that each serve a different purpose. The subland drill is capable of drilling more than one diameter. The spade drill is used to drill larger hole sizes. The indexable drill is useful in managing chips.
Spot drilling
The purpose of spot drilling is to drill a hole that will act as a guide for drilling the final hole. The hole is only drilled part way into the workpiece because it is only used to guide the beginning of the next drilling process.
Centre drilling
Centre drill is a two-fluted tool consisting of a twist drill with a 60° countersink; used to drill countersink center holes in a workpiece to be mounted between centers for turning or grinding.
Deep hole drilling
Deep hole drilling is defined as drilling a hole of depth greater than ten times the diameter of the hole. These types of holes require special equipment to maintain the straightness and tolerances. Other considerations are roundness and surface finish.
Deep hole drilling is generally achievable with a few tooling methods, usually gun drilling or BTA drilling. These are differentiated due to the coolant entry method (internal or external) and chip removal method (internal or external). Using methods such as a rotating tool and counter-rotating workpiece are common techniques to achieve required straightness tolerances. Secondary tooling methods include trepanning, skiving and burnishing, pull boring, or bottle boring. Finally, a new kind of drilling technology is available to face this issue: vibration drilling. This technology breaks up the chips by a small controlled axial vibration of the drill. The small chips are easily removed by the flutes of the drill.
A high tech monitoring system is used to control force, torque, vibrations, and acoustic emission. Vibration is considered a major defect in deep hole drilling which can often cause the drill to break. A special coolant is usually used to aid in this type of drilling.
Gun drilling
Gun drilling was originally developed to drill out gun barrels and is used commonly for drilling smaller diameter deep holes. The depth-to-diameter ratio can be even greater than 300:1. The key feature of gun drilling is that the bits are self-centering; this is what allows for such deep accurate holes. The bits use a rotary motion similar to a twist drill; however, the bits are designed with bearing pads that slide along the surface of the hole keeping the drill bit on center. Gun drilling is usually done at high speeds and low feed rates.
Trepanning
Trepanning is commonly used for creating larger diameter holes (up to 915 mm (36.0 in)) where a standard drill bit is not feasible or economical. Trepanning removes the desired diameter by cutting out a solid disk similar to the workings of a drafting compass. Trepanning is performed on flat products such as sheet metal, granite (curling stone), plates, or structural members like I-beams. Trepanning can also be useful to make grooves for inserting seals, such as O-rings.
Microdrilling
Microdrilling refers to the drilling of holes less than 0.5 mm (0.020 in). Drilling of holes at this small diameter presents greater problems since coolant fed drills cannot be used and high spindle speeds are required. High spindle speeds that exceed 10,000 RPM also require the use of balanced tool holders.
Vibration drilling
The first studies into vibration drilling began in the 1950s (Pr. V.N. Poduraev, Moscow Bauman University). The main principle consists in axial vibrations or oscillations in addition to the feed movement of the drill so that the chips break up and are then easily removed from the cutting zone.
There are two main technologies of vibration drilling: self-maintained vibration systems and forced vibration systems. Most vibration drilling technologies are still at a research stage. In the case of self-maintained vibration drilling, the eigenfrequency of the tool is used in order to make it naturally vibrate while cutting; vibrations are self-maintained by a mass-spring system included in the tool holder. Other works use a piezoelectric system to generate and control the vibrations. These systems allow high vibration frequencies (up to 2 kHz) for small magnitude (about a few micrometers); they are particularly suitable for drilling small holes. Finally, vibrations can be generated by mechanical systems: the frequency is given by the combination of the rotation speed and the number of oscillation per rotation (a few oscillations per rotation), with magnitude about 0.1 mm.
This last technology is a fully industrial one (example: SineHoling® technology of MITIS). Vibration drilling is a preferred solution in situations like deep hole drilling, multi-material stack drilling (aeronautics) and dry drilling (without lubrication). Generally, it provides improved reliability and greater control of the drilling operation.
Circle interpolating
Circle interpolating, also known as orbital drilling, is a process for creating holes using machine cutters.
Orbital drilling is based on rotating a cutting tool around its own axis and simultaneously about a centre axis which is off-set from the axis of the cutting tool. The cutting tool can then be moved simultaneously in an axial direction to drill or machine a hole – and/or combined with an arbitrary sidewards motion to machine an opening or cavity.
By adjusting the offset, a cutting tool of a specific diameter can be used to drill holes of different diameters as illustrated. This implies that the cutting tool inventory can be substantially reduced.
The term orbital drilling comes from that the cutting tool “orbits” around the hole center. The mechanically forced, dynamic offset in orbital drilling has several advantages compared to conventional drilling that drastically increases the hole precision. The lower thrust force results in a burr-less hole when drilling in metals. When drilling in composite materials the problem with delamination is eliminated.
Material
Drilling in metal
Under normal usage, swarf is carried up and away from the tip of the drill bit by the fluting of the drill bit. The cutting edges produce more chips which continue the movement of the chips outwards from the hole. This is successful until the chips pack too tightly, either because of deeper than normal holes or insufficient backing off (removing the drill slightly or totally from the hole while drilling). Cutting fluid is sometimes used to ease this problem and to prolong the tool's life by cooling and lubricating the tip and chip flow. Coolant may be introduced via holes through the drill shank, which is common when using a gun drill. When cutting aluminum in particular, cutting fluid helps ensure a smooth and accurate hole while preventing the metal from grabbing the drill bit in the process of drilling the hole. When cutting brass, and other soft metals that can grab the drill bit and causes "chatter", a face of approx. 1-2 millimeters can be ground on the cutting edge to create an obtuse angle of 91 to 93 degrees. This prevents "chatter" during which the drill tears rather than cuts the metal. However, with that shape of bit cutting edge, the drill is pushing the metal away, rather than grabbing the metal. This creates high friction and very hot swarf.
For heavy feeds and comparatively deep holes oil-hole drills are used in the drill bit, with a lubricant pumped to the drill head through a small hole in the bit and flowing out along the fluting. A conventional drill press arrangement can be used in oil-hole drilling, but it is more commonly seen in automatic drilling machinery in which it is the workpiece that rotates rather than the drill bit.
In computer numerical control (CNC) machine tools a process called peck drilling, or interrupted cut drilling, is used to keep swarf from detrimentally building up when drilling deep holes (approximately when the depth of the hole is three times greater than the drill diameter). Peck drilling involves plunging the drill part way through the workpiece, no more than five times the diameter of the drill, and then retracting it to the surface. This is repeated until the hole is finished. A modified form of this process, called high speed peck drilling or chip breaking, only retracts the drill slightly. This process is faster, but is only used in moderately long holes, otherwise it will overheat the drill bit. It is also used when drilling stringy material to break the chips.
When it is not possible to bring the material to the СNС machine, a Magnetic Base Drilling Machine may be used. The base allows drilling in a horizontal position and even on a ceiling. Usually, for these machines, it is better to use cutters because they can drill much faster with less speed. Cutter sizes vary from 12mm to 200mm DIA and from 30mm to 200mm DOC(depth of cut). These machines are widely used in construction, fabrication, marine, and oil & gas industries. In the oil and gas industry, pneumatic magnetic drilling machines are used to avoid sparks, as well as special tube magnetic drilling machines that can be fixed on pipes of different sizes, even inside. Heavy-duty plate drilling machines provide high-quality solutions in the manufacturing of steel construction, bridge construction, shipyards, and various fields of the construction sector.
Drilling in wood
Wood being softer than most metals, drilling in wood is considerably easier and faster than drilling in metal. Cutting fluids are not used or needed. The main issue in drilling wood is ensuring clean entry and exit holes and preventing burning. Avoiding burning is a question of using sharp bits and the appropriate cutting speed. Drill bits can tear out chips of wood around the top and bottom of the hole and this is undesirable in fine woodworking applications.
The ubiquitous twist drill bits used in metalworking also work well in wood, but they tend to chip wood out at the entry and exit of the hole. In some cases, as in holes for rough carpentry, the quality of the hole does not matter, and a number of bits for fast cutting in wood exist, including spade bits and self-feeding auger bits. Many types of specialised drill bits for boring clean holes in wood have been developed, including brad-point bits, Forstner bits and hole saws. Chipping on exit can be minimized by using a piece of wood as backing behind the work piece, and the same technique is sometimes used to keep the hole entry neat.
Holes are easier to start in wood as the drill bit can be accurately positioned by pushing it into the wood and creating a dimple. The bit will thus have little tendency to wander.
Others
Some materials like plastics as well as other non-metals and some metals have a tendency to heat up enough to expand making the hole smaller than desired.
Related processes
The following are some related processes that often accompany drilling:
Counterboring
This process creates a stepped hole in which a larger diameter follows a smaller diameter partially into a hole.
Countersinking
This process is similar to counterboring but the step in the hole is cone-shaped.
Boring
Boring precisely enlarges an already existing hole using a single point cutter.
Friction drilling
drilling holes using plastic deformation of the subject (under heat and pressure) instead of cutting it.
Reaming
Reaming is designed to enlarge the size of a hole to leave smooth sides.
Spot facing
This is similar to milling, it is used to provide a flat machine surface on the workpiece in a localized area

Dynamic recrystallization (DRX) is a type of recrystallization process, found within the fields of metallurgy and geology. In dynamic recrystallization, as opposed to static recrystallization, the nucleation and growth of new grains occurs during deformation rather than afterwards as part of a separate heat treatment. The reduction of grain size increases the risk of grain boundary sliding at elevated temperatures, while also decreasing dislocation mobility within the material. The new grains are less strained, causing a decrease in the hardening of a material. Dynamic recrystallization allows for new grain sizes and orientation, which can prevent crack propagation. Rather than strain causing the material to fracture, strain can initiate the growth of a new grain, consuming atoms from neighboring pre-existing grains. After dynamic recrystallization, the ductility of the material increases.
In a stress–strain curve, the onset of dynamic recrystallization can be recognized by a distinct peak in the flow stress in hot working data, due to the softening effect of recrystallization. However, not all materials display well-defined peaks when tested under hot working conditions. The onset of DRX can also be detected from inflection point in plots of the strain hardening rate against stress. It has been shown that this technique can be used to establish the occurrence of DRX when this cannot be determined unambiguously from the shape of the flow curve.
If stress oscillations appear before reaching the steady state, then several recrystallization and grain growth cycles occur and the stress behavior is said to be of the cyclic or multiple peak type. The particular stress behavior before reaching the steady state depends on the initial grain size, temperature, and strain rate.
DRX can occur in various forms, including:
Geometric dynamic recrystallization
Discontinuous dynamic recrystallization
Continuous dynamic recrystallization
Dynamic recrystallization is dependent on the rate of dislocation creation and movement. It is also dependent on the recovery rate (the rate at which dislocations annihilate). The interplay between work hardening and dynamic recovery determines grain structure. It also determines the susceptibility of grains to various types of dynamic recrystallization. Regardless of the mechanism, for dynamic crystallization to occur, the material must have experienced a critical deformation. The final grain size increases with increased stress. To achieve very fine-grained structures the stresses have to be high.
Some authors have used the term 'postdynamic' or 'metadynamic' to describe recrystallization that occurs during the cooling phase of a hot-working process or between successive passes. This emphasises the fact that the recrystallization is directly linked to the process in question, while acknowledging that there is no concurrent deformation.
Geometric Dynamic Recrystallization (GDRX)
Geometric dynamic recrystallization occurs in grains with local serrations. Upon deformation, grains undergoing GDRX elongate until the thickness of the grain falls below a threshold (below which the serration boundaries intersect and small grains pinch off into equiaxed grains). The serrations may predate stresses being exerted on the material, or may result from the material’s deformation.
Geometric Dynamic Recrystallization has 6 main characteristics:
It generally occurs with deformation at elevated temperatures, in materials with high stacking fault energy
Stress increases and then declines to a steady state
Subgrain formation requires a critical deformation
Subgrain misorientation peaks at 2˚
There is little texture change
Pinning of grain boundaries causes an increase in the required strain
While GDRX is primarily affected by the initial grain size and strain (geometry-dependent), other factors that occur during the hot working process complicate the development of predictive modeling (which tend to oversimplify the process) and can lead to incomplete recrystallization. The equiaxed grain formation does not occur immediately and uniformly along the entire grain once the threshold stress is reached, as individual regions are subjected to different strains/stresses. In practice, a generally sinusoidal edge (as predicted by Martorano et al.) gradually forms as the grains begin to pinch off as they each reach the threshold. More sophisticated models consider complex initial grain geometries, local pressures along grain boundaries, and hot working temperature, but the models are unable to make accurate predictions throughout the entire stress regime and the evolution of the overall microstructure. Additionally, grain boundaries may migrate during GDRX at high temperatures and GB curvatures, dragging along subgrain boundaries and resulting in unwanted growth of the original grain. This new, larger grain will require far more deformation for GDRX to occur, and the local area will be weaker rather than strengthened. Lastly, recrystallization can be accelerated as grains are shifted and stretched, causing subgrain boundaries to become grain boundaries (angle increases). The affected grains are thinner and longer, and thus more easily undergo deformation.
Discontinuous Dynamic Recrystallization
Discontinuous recrystallization is heterogeneous; there are distinct nucleation and growth stages. It is common in materials with low stacking-fault energy. Nucleation then occurs, generating new strain-free grains which absorb the pre-existing strained grains. It occurs more easily at grain boundaries, decreasing the grain size and thereby increasing the amount of nucleation sites. This further increases the rate of discontinuous dynamic recrystallization.
Discontinuous Dynamic Recrystallization has 5 main characteristics:
Recrystallization does not occur until the threshold strain has been reached
The stress-strain curve may have several peaks – there is not a universal equation
Nucleation generally occurs along pre-existing grain boundaries
Recrystallization rates increase as the initial grain size decreases
There is a steady grain size which is approached as recrystallization proceeds
Discontinuous dynamic recrystallization is caused by the interplay of work hardening and recovery. If the annihilation of dislocations is slow relative to the rate at which they are generated, dislocations accumulate. Once critical dislocation density is achieved, nucleation occurs on grain boundaries. Grain boundary migration, or the atoms transfer from a large pre-existing grain to a smaller nucleus, allows the growth of the new nuclei at the expense of the pre-existing grains. The nucleation can occur through the bulging of existing grain boundaries. A bulge forms if the subgrains abutting a grain boundary are of different sizes, causing a disparity in energy from the two subgrains. If the bulge achieves a critical radius, it will successfully transition to a stable nucleus and continue its growth. This can be modeled using Cahn’s theories pertaining to nucleation and growth.
Discontinuous dynamic recrystallization commonly produces a ‘necklace’ microstructure. Since new grain growth is energetically favorable along grain boundaries, new grain formation and bulging preferentially occurs along pre-existing grain boundaries. This generates layers of new, very fine grains along the grain boundary initially leaving the interior of the pre-existing grain unaffected. As the dynamic recrystallization continues, it consumes the unrecrystallized region. As deformation continues, the recrystallization does not maintain coherency between layers of new nuclei, producing a random texture.
Continuous Dynamic Recrystallization
Continuous dynamic recrystallization is common in materials with high stacking-fault energies. It occurs when low angle grain boundaries form and evolve into high angle boundaries, forming new grains in the process. For continuous dynamic recrystallization there is no clear distinction between nucleation and growth phases of the new grains.
Continuous Dynamic Recrystallization has 4 main characteristics:
As strain increases, stress increases
As strain increases, subgrain boundary misorientation increases
As low angle grain boundaries evolve into high angle grain boundaries, the misorientation increases homogeneously
As deformation increases, crystallite size decreases
There are three main mechanisms of continuous dynamic recrystallization:
First, continuous dynamic recrystallization can occur when low angle grain boundaries are assembled from dislocations formed within the grain. When the material is subjected to continued stress, the misorientation angle increases until the critical angle is achieved, creating a high angle grain boundary. This evolution can be promoted by the pinning of subgrain boundaries.
Second, continuous dynamic recrystallization can occur through subgrain rotation recrystallization; subgrains rotate increasing the misorientation angle. Once the misorientation angle exceeds the critical angle, the former subgrains qualify as independent grains.
Third, continuous dynamic recrystallization can occur due to deformation caused by microshear bands. Subgrains are assembled by dislocations within the grain formed during work hardening. If microshear bands are formed within the grain, the stress they introduce rapidly increases the misorientation of low angle grain boundaries, transforming them into high angle grain boundaries. However, the impact of microshear bands are localized, so this mechanism preferentially impacts regions which deform heterogeneously, such as microshear bands or areas near pre-existing grain boundaries. As recrystallization proceeds, it spreads out from these zones, generating a homogenous, equiaxed microstructure.
Mathematical Formulas
Based on the method developed by Poliak and Jonas, a few models are developed in order to describe the critical strain for the onset of DRX as a function of the peak strain of the stress–strain curve. The models are derived for the systems with single peak, i.e. for the materials with medium to low stacking fault energy values. The models can be found in the following papers:
Determination of flow stress and the critical strain for the onset of dynamic recrystallization using a sine function
Determination of flow stress and the critical strain for the onset of dynamic recrystallization using a hyperbolic tangent function
Determination of critical strain for initiation of dynamic recrystallization
Characteristic points of stress–strain curve at high temperature
The DRX behavior for systems with multiple peaks (and single peak as well) can be modeled considering the interaction of multiple grains during deformation. I. e. the ensemble model describes the transition between single and multi peak behavior based on the initial grain size. It can also describe the effect of transient changes of the strain rate on the shape of the flow curve. The model can be found in the following paper:
A new unified approach for modeling recrystallization during hot rolling of steel
Literature
A one-parmenter approach to determining the critical conditions for the initiation of dynamic recrystallization, onset of DRX
Flow Curve Analysis of 17–4 PH Stainless Steel under Hot Compression Test, comprehensive study of DRX
Constitutive relations to model the hot flow of commercial purity copper, chapter 6, doctoral thesis by V.G. García, UPC (2004)
A review of dynamic recrystallization phenomena in metallic materials, Latest review paper on DRX
A Cellular Automaton Model of Dynamic Recrystallization: Introduction & Source Code, Software simulating DRX by CA: Introduction, Video of software run

Earthenware is glazed or unglazed nonvitreous pottery that has normally been fired below 1,200 °C (2,190 °F). Basic earthenware, often called terracotta, absorbs liquids such as water. However, earthenware can be made impervious to liquids by coating it with a ceramic glaze, and such a process is used for the great majority of modern domestic earthenware. The main other important types of pottery are porcelain, bone china, and stoneware, all fired at high enough temperatures to vitrify. End applications include tableware and decorative ware such as figurines.
Earthenware comprises "most building bricks, nearly all European pottery up to the seventeenth century, most of the wares of Egypt, Persia and the near East; Greek, Roman and Mediterranean, and some of the Chinese; and the fine earthenware which forms the greater part of our tableware today" ("today" being 1962). Pit fired earthenware dates back to as early as 29,000–25,000 BC, and for millennia, only earthenware pottery was made, with stoneware gradually developing some 5,000 years ago, but then apparently disappearing for a few thousand years. Outside East Asia, porcelain was manufactured at any scale only from the 18th century AD, and then initially as an expensive luxury.
After it is fired, earthenware is opaque and non-vitreous, soft and capable of being scratched with a knife. The Combined Nomenclature of the European Union describes it as being made of selected clays sometimes mixed with feldspars and varying amounts of other minerals, and white or light-coloured (i.e., slightly greyish, cream, or ivory).
Characteristics
Generally, unfired earthenware bodies exhibit higher plasticity than most whiteware bodies and hence are easier to shape by RAM press, roller-head or potter's wheel than bone china or porcelain.
Due to its porosity, fired earthenware, with a water absorption of 5-8%, must be glazed to be watertight. Earthenware has lower mechanical strength than bone china, porcelain or stoneware, and consequently articles are commonly made in thicker cross-section, although they are still more easily chipped.
Darker-coloured terracotta earthenware, typically orange or red due to a comparatively high content of iron oxides, is widely used for flower pots, tiles and some decorative and oven ware.
Production
Materials
The compositions of earthenware bodies vary considerably, and include both prepared and 'as dug'; the former being by far the dominant type for studio and industry. A general body formulation for contemporary earthenware is 25% kaolin, 25% ball clay, 35% quartz and 15% feldspar.
Firing
Earthenware can be produced at firing temperatures as low as 600 °C (1,112 °F) and many clays will not fire successfully above about 1,000 °C (1,830 °F). Much historical pottery was fired somewhere around 800 °C (1,470 °F), giving a wide margin of error where there was no precise way of measuring temperature, and very variable conditions within the kiln.
Modern earthenware may be biscuit (or "bisque") fired to temperatures between 1,000 and 1,150 °C (1,830 and 2,100 °F) and glost-fired (or "glaze-fired") to between 950 and 1,050 °C (1,740 and 1,920 °F). Some studio potters follow the reverse practice, with a low-temperature biscuit firing and a high-temperature glost firing. Oxidising atmospheres are the most common.
After firing, most earthenware bodies will be colored white, buff, or red. For iron-rich bodies earthenware, firing at comparatively low temperature in an oxidising atmosphere results in a red colour, whilst higher temperatures with a reducing atmosphere results in darker colours, including black. Higher firing temperatures may cause earthenware to bloat.
Examples of earthenware
Despite the most highly valued types of pottery often switching to stoneware and porcelain as these were developed by a particular culture, there are many artistically important types of earthenware. All ancient Greek and ancient Roman pottery is earthenware, as is the Hispano-Moresque ware of the late Middle Ages, which developed into tin-glazed pottery or faience traditions in several parts of Europe, mostly notably the painted maiolica of the Italian Renaissance, and Dutch Delftware. With a white glaze, these were able to imitate porcelains both from East Asia and Europe.
Amongst the most complicated earthenware ever made are the life-size Yixian glazed pottery luohans of the Liao dynasty (907–1125), Saint-Porchaire ware of the mid-16th century, apparently made for the French court and the life-size majolica peacocks by Mintons in the 1860s.
In the 18th century, especially in English Staffordshire pottery, technical improvements enabled very fine wares such as Wedgwood's creamware, that competed with porcelain with considerable success, as his huge creamware Frog Service for Catherine the Great showed. The invention of transfer printing processes made highly decorated wares cheap enough for far wider sections of the population in Europe.
In China, sancai glazed wares were lead-glazed earthenware, and as elsewhere, terracotta remained important for sculpture. The Etruscans had made large sculptures such as statues in it, where the Romans used it mainly for figurines and Campana reliefs. Chinese painted or Tang dynasty tomb figures were earthenware as were the later Yixian glazed pottery luohans. After the ceramic figurine was revived in European porcelain, earthenware figures followed, such as the popular English Staffordshire figures.
Sanitaryware
During the 19th century, glazed earthenware was the primary material used to transition lavatory facilities from rudimentary outdoor privies to indoor flush toilets. These early "wash-out" and "long-hopper" closets were crafted from a thick, porous ceramic body that required a heavy feldspathic or salt glaze to remain impermeable and functional. To ensure the durability of these fixtures, manufacturers often utilized a "cane and white" finish, where the exterior remained a natural buff colour while the interior received a hygienic, white glaze.
Manufacturers such as Twyford and Doulton refined these designs, often decorating the bowls with intricate blue-and-white transfer prints to make them appear more like fine furniture than industrial plumbing. This aesthetic approach helped overcome the Victorian era's social taboos regarding indoor sanitation.
However, earthenware exhibited significant technical weaknesses for this application: the body was easily chipped, the glaze would craze over time and the underlying porous ceramic would absorb moisture and odours. This inherent lack of hygienic characteristics spurred the late-century shift towards fireclay ceramic and vitreous china, which has higher densities and are fully vitrified as required for modern sanitary standards.

An eccentric flint is an elite chipped artifact of an often irregular ('eccentric') shape produced by the Classic Maya civilization of ancient Mesoamerica. Although generally referred to as "flints", they were typically fashioned from chert, chalcedony and obsidian.
Distribution
Eccentric flints were first categorised by western archaeologists in Belize in the first half of the 20th century, when they were identified as ceremonial in nature. The objects are generally found in the eastern portion of the central Maya area, in the Petén Department of Guatemala and in neighbouring Belize, with few in the west and the Yucatán Peninsula. Very few have been recovered from the Guatemalan Highlands and it is unlikely they were ever manufactured there. Small obsidian eccentrics have been found at the great metropolis of Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico.
Physical characteristics
Eccentric flints are among the finest lithic artifacts produced by the ancient Maya. They were very technically challenging to produce, requiring considerable skill on the part of the artisan. Large obsidian eccentrics can measure over 30 centimetres (12 in) in length. Their actual form varies considerably but they generally depict human, animal and geometric forms associated with Maya religion.
Context and possible use
Most examples of eccentric flints have been recovered from caches interred under Maya monuments and buildings. Thus, a cache under the altar of Copan's stela M, at the foot of the Hieroglyphic Stairway, rendered three identical eccentric flints, each shaped like a human figure extending into a tang and evincing six human head outgrowths. Nine eccentric flints with human figures found in an early Copan temple room (temple 16, Rosalila phase), and originally wrapped in a deep blue cloth, show similar tangs. The presence of these tangs suggests that the examples concerned may originally have been set into a shaft or handle, possibly as the head of a sceptre, or as the blade of an axe. Some flint eccentrics were unsuitable for wearing or carrying and they may have been sculpted specifically to be buried as an offering.
Subjects depicted
Eccentric flints show a great variety of forms, such as crescents, crosses, snakes, and scorpions. The largest and most elaborate ones display multiple human heads, with minor heads sometimes branching off from larger ones (see fig. 1). The human face is youthful and crafted as a simple outline, with emphasis on the sloping forehead and the lips. An element more or less resembling a smoking torch, and symbolizing lightning, is often set in the forehead (see fig. 2). For this reason, these human faces are commonly regarded as transformations of the lightning deity, god K (K'awiil). More specifically, they appear to represent the Tonsured Maize God as a lightning deity, perhaps in a protective role. Eccentric flints representing the lightning deity himself are also found, though with less frequency, while some eccentric flints combine both human and God K faces. The most famous eccentric flint is perhaps the one interpreted by Linda Schele and her co-authors as a 'crocodile canoe' transporting the anthropomorphic soul of the dead as its 'passenger'.
Anthropological background
As a background to the eccentric flints showing deities associated with lightning, it is noteworthy that among the traditional Maya and in Mesoamerica generally, obsidian is considered "fossilized lightning", sometimes believed to have split off from the lightning deities' axes. The lightning deity warrants agricultural fertility. As to the 'lightnings' with a human aspect, certain powerful individuals are believed to possess lightning energies, and to have the lightning bolt for a transformation.

Ecoforestry has been defined as selection forestry or restoration forestry. The main idea of ecoforestry is to maintain or restore the forest to standards where the forest may still be harvested for products on a sustainable basis. Ecoforestry is forestry that emphasizes holistic practices which strive to protect and restore ecosystems rather than maximize economic productivity. Sustainability of the forest also comes with uncertainties. There are other factors that may affect the forest furthermore than that of the harvesting. There are internal conditions such as effects of soil compaction, tree damage, disease, fire, and blow down that also directly affect the ecosystem. These factors have to be taken into account when determining the sustainability of a forest. If these factors are added to the harvesting and production that comes out of the forest, then the forest will become less likely to survive, and will then become less sustainable.
Since the forest is considered an ecosystem, it is dependent on all of the living and non-living factors within itself. This is a major part of why the forest needs to be sustainable before it is harvested. For example, a tree, by way of photosynthesis, converts sunlight to sugars for respiration to keep the tree alive. The remains of the converted sugars is left in roots for consumption by the organisms surrounding the tree in the habitat. This shows the productivity of an ecosystem with its inhabitants. Productivity within the ecosystem cannot come to fruition unless the forest is sustainable enough to be harvested. If most individual organisms of the ecosystem vanish, the ecosystem itself is at risk. Once that happens, there is no longer any forest to harvest from. The overall productivity of a system can be found in an equation where the Net Primary Production, or NPP, is equal to the Gross Primary Production, or GPP, minus the Respiration, or R. The formula is the NPP = GPP - R. The NPP is the overall efficiency of the plants in the ecosystem. Through having a constant efficiency in NPP, the ecosystem is then more sustainable. The GPP refers to the rate of energy stored by photosynthesis in plants. The R refers to the maintenance and reproduction of plants from the energy expended.
Ecoforestry has many principles within the existence of itself. It covers sustainable development and the fair harvesting of the organisms living within the forest ecosystem. There have been many proposals of principles outlined for ecoforestry. They are covered over books, articles, and environmental agencies. All of the principles relate to the idea that in ecoforestry, less should be harvested, and diversity must be managed. Through harvesting less, there is enough biomass left in the forest, so that the forest may stay healthy and still stay maintained. It will grow at a sustainable level annually, and thus it will be able to still be harvested the following year. Through management of the diversity, species may cohabitate in an ecosystem where the forest may feed off of other species in its growth and production. The Principles of Ecoforestry may be found below.
Principles of ecoforestry
The principles of ecoforestry are:
Analog forestry
Analog forestry is an approach to ecosystem restoration that considers the process of forest formation and the functioning of forest services to be critical in establishing a sustainable ecosystem characterised by a high biodiversity to biomass ratio. Analogue forestry uses a synthesis of traditional and scientific knowledge to optimize the productive potential of the restoration design rather than maximise the production of one crop, and maximise ecosystem services by increasing the volumetric mass of the photosynthetic component.
Analogue forestry draws design input not only from traditional models but also from the natural forest successional dynamics. When an ecosystem is designed to be analogous to the indigenous climax state, the efficiency and dynamics of the natural processes can be replicated. These quasi-natural forests are designed to mimic the structural and functional aspects of indigenous forests and are referred to as analog forests. In addition to their ecological characteristics, analog forests are also designed to provide economic benefits. However, it is not until all the ecological requirements of the location are satisfied that economic values of species are considered. Therefore, an analog forest may comprise natural and exotic species in any proportion, the contribution to structure and function being the overriding factor that determines its use.
The theoretical underpinnings began in 1978 in San Diego and Guatemala. It was first implemented in Sri Lanka around 1981 by Ranil Senanayake as an alternative to monocultures of Pinus and Eucalyptus and has spread to India, Vietnam, Philippines, Australia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Honduras, Mexico, Canada, Kenya and Zimbabwe at present.
The International Analog Forestry Network (IAFN) is currently hosted in Costa Rica.
Analog forestry is a system of silviculture that seeks to design, plan and manage ecosystems dominated by woody perennials. It has been primarily employed in tropical or subtropical areas, but can be used in temperate areas too. The design seeks to mimic the architectural structure and ecological function of the preexisting climax vegetation of the area, and can be designed to provide economic, social and environmental benefits.
Analog forestry always considers the inclusion of non-crop native species to be considered in the design and thus addresses the inclusion of native biodiversity in the design. As analog forestry also requires the inclusion of long-lived species of trees in the design it has the capacity to sequester carbon for a longer time than plantation forestry. Analogue forestry has the potential to produce very high values of photosynthetic biomass as its design calls for the inclusion of all the growth forms that occupy the three-dimensional space of the mature indigenous forest. By including many species of crops in one area analog forestry helps spread the risk of market failure on a single crop.
Close to nature forestry
Close to nature forestry is a forest management approach treating forest as an ecological system (ecosystem) performing multiple functions. It is developing in the peri-alpine countries of Europe (such as Switzerland, France, Germany and Slovenia) for more than 70 years, based on certain sustainable forest management practices from the late 19th century. Close to nature silviculture tries to achieve the management objectives with minimum necessary human intervention aimed at accelerating the processes that nature would do by itself more slowly. It works with natural populations of trees, ongoing processes and existing structures using cognitive approach, as in the case of so called (individual or group) selection forest (German: Plenterwald) or other types of uneven-aged forests. Its theory and practice takes forest as a self regulating ecosystem and manages it as such.
It aims at overcoming the divorce between forester and ecologist. As an important consequence, it concludes that if properly applied, it would render the segregation of forest lands into "productive" and "protected" unnecessary.
History
Europe
The Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Naturgemässe Waldwirtschaft (ANW) (German: Working Group for the Close to Nature Forestry) was established in Germany in 1950. In recent years this association has increased a lot its membership. The main reasons being the increase of ecological consciousness, the growing demand for forest products or services other than wood, the damages suffered by regular forest stands, the forest death fear. Another term often used to describe a close to nature approach to forest management, especially in Britain and Ireland, is Continuous Cover Forestry.
Because of a 1948 forest law that put a ban on clear-cutting, Slovenia has many forests managed according to the principles of close to nature forestry. In 1989 ANW promoted a meeting at Robanov Kot in Slovenia, in the Julian Alps, and the Pro Silva organization was created, with representatives of 10 countries. At present the organization headquarters are in the French region of Alsace.
North America
In the United States, professor Thomas J. McEvoy has published the book Positive Impact Forestry, which recommends forestry practices similar to those of the "close to nature" movement. He thinks that the precursors of this type of forestry are to be found in Europe, mainly in Germany, and particularly makes mention of Heinrich Cotta, and his famous Cotta's Preface, which highlighted the importance that the study and understanding of nature should have for the foresters. As a more immediate precursor he makes reference to American forester and ecologist Aldo Leopold.
The Ecoforestry Institute consists on educational, non profit and non governmental organizations operating in US and Canada. They propose a forestry based on ecological principles, very similar to those of Pro Silva.
Forest management/ecosystem management
The close to nature approach intends to bridge the discrepancies, or even antagonisms between the silvicultural and ecological visions on the single reality of forest, considering the forest as an ecological system that produces wood. The sought after solution is not to segregate the territory into areas devoted to either forestry or ecology, but to integrate all functions.
Objective
The management has to obtain healthy and stable forest systems that produce wood with a minimum human intervention. The products to obtain, other than wood, are fauna habitats, biodiversity, recreational, aesthetics, and water management. The human action has the object of accelerating natural processes, but not substitute them.
Silvicultural models
Pro Silva recommends to use the uneven-aged forest system, in which the ages, and consequently sizes, of trees in a forest are different. It has the advantage to offer a stable structure regarding natural disasters and plagues, and is very adequate for fauna habitat and biodiversity promotion. It provides a better soil protection, since there is a permanent tree cover.
McEvoy considers that in spite of being the most close to nature system, it is difficult to implement, and proposes to use the high regular forest model, in which all trees are of the same age/size, but recommends using a regeneration system with a generous cover, to avoid soil erosion, and prevent excessive light entrance, which would promote the growth of a potent understorey.
The Ecoforestry Institute, similarly to Pro Silva, recommends multi-aged and multi-species forests.
Recommended practices
Proposed thinning frequency is about ten years, and intensity low, in order to limit the ingress of excessive light, which could promote too much understory, or the growing of epicormic shoots. It has to be directed to favor the trees that show good prospect for the future. The operations have to be done in a way that will avoid soil compaction or damage to the trees that will remain standing.
Native/introduced species
When foresters plant trees, they may use either native or introduced species. Whenever foresters decide to use a species that is not native, they do it because they think that there are silvicultural advantages linked to this choice, be they the wood quality, ease of management, adaptation to the climatic conditions, shorter production delay, etc. It may be that there is information available about the behavior of this species in the habitat, or the forester is ready to make a trial.
From the ecological point of view, the introducing species is considered as a threat. The introduced species risks being invasive. Invasives displace local species, resulting in a reduction of biodiversity, a condition also to be expected if great extensions are forested using introduced species.
McEvoy is very clear and strict: introduced species can not be used at all when working in a close to nature forestry system. Pro Silva makes some distinctions, based on species and conditions. Natural forest systems are to be preserved, but the enrichment with certain introduced species may be positive, depending on circumstances.
Pro Silva recommendations
The natural vegetation systems for each region are an asset to maintain, and constitute an important basis for the silvicultural planning.
Introduced species can, depending on circumstances, supplement natural species, and add economical revenue.
The forest species that are introduced to a region are termed exotic.
The introduction of exotic species should only be permitted after trials conducted from the qualitative and quantitative point of view.
Herbivore fauna management
The herbivore fauna, be it domesticated or wild, acts on tree seedlings and small trees. In high regular forests, the regeneration periods are chosen by the forester, and therefore it is possible to establish some control over fauna action, particularly domesticated fauna, avoiding grazing during regeneration. The un-even aged forest is continuously regenerating, and therefore it is difficult to make it compatible with grazing, and does not admit a high density of wild herbivore fauna. The pressure of herbivore fauna, mainly cervids, in some European forests, has reached an intensity that is threatening the practice of close to nature forestry.
Economic aspects
Forestry's economic profitability has progressively diminished in developed countries, beginning at the end of the 20th century. This has been the result of lower lumber prices and higher operating costs. Because it requires less human intervention, the close to nature forestry has lower labor costs. Also, it encourages the evolution of forests toward higher ecologic and landscape value structures. This is in demand by society, and the payment for ecosystem services is being considered
Social and community aspects
Social and community aspects entail the management of the forestry block with the minimum disturbance caused from outside. This is important as nature forestry is taking place not in complete isolation from human activities and animals grazing/browsing but within the same landscape where communities are present. The people around should be well-integrated into the forest lot in order to ensure its sustainable management. In this respect the three important issues are: protect the forest from all types of fires including extinguishing any fires that may occur during forest growth, prevention of all types of illegal removal of timber, poles and the like and, prevention of animals especially browsers entering the reserve. The trio activities are heavily influenced by the people who live around the forest block being managed. It is therefore of paramount importance that the local people should be included in any program leading to the management of nature forestry initiative. The purpose of community involvement in its management is basically to ensure forest protection against activities either introduced such as illegal removal of timber, driving of animals into the forest or natural such as control of bush fires. As the community is in close proximity to the site who has the labor power and other means to prevent destructive activities and their presence is on 24/7 basis, it became all the more important to utilize their potential power for the protection of the forest lot. In this connection, they need to be fully made aware of the purpose of forest management, they be provided with education and other skills development opportunities for forest management, they be allowed to reap some benefits such as the collection of non-timber forest products. The community is also able to provide labor for forest management activities at a cheaper rate compared to the work being done by people brought from elsewhere. It is unrealistic to think about any nature forestry initiative without considering the needs, aspirations, customs of the local community.
Close to nature forestry/sustainable forestry
Sustainable forest management has evolved to include multifunctional management, like close to nature forestry does. Nevertheless there is a distinction between them since the first seeks a compromise between competing interests, while close to nature forestry uses biodiversity improvement as a tool to improve forestry itself.

Edge banding or edgebanding is the name of both a process, and an associated narrow strip of material. It is used to create durable and aesthetically pleasing trim edges during finish carpentry. The method is used to cover the exposed sides of materials such as plywood, particle board, or MDF. This increases durability and creates the appearance of a more solid or valuable material.
Process
The edge banding or edgebanding method is used to create durable and aesthetically pleasing trim edges during finish carpentry. Traditional edge banding was a manual process requiring ordinary carpentry tools and materials.
In modern applications, particularly for high-volume, repetitive manufacturing steps, the production of as cabinet doors for example, edge banding is applied to the substrate by an automated process using a hot-melt adhesive. Hot melt adhesives may consist of various raw materials including ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA), polyurethanes (TPU), polyacrylate (PA), APOA, and polyolefins (PO). A substrate primer may also be used as a bonding agent between the adhesive and the substrate. Thicker edge bandings typically require a slight concavity to provide a tight glue line. The thickness can vary from .018 in (0.46 mm) to 0.20 in (5 mm) or even more.
The machine that applies the edge banding is called edge bander. An edge bander bonds the edge banding to the substrate, trims the leading and trailing edges, trims top and bottom flush with the substrate, scraps any surplus, and buffs the finished edge.
Material
Edge-banding or edge tape can refer to the narrow strip of material being used as the veneer. Edge banding is used to cover the exposed sides of materials such as plywood, particle board, or MDF. This increases durability and gives the appearance of a solid or more valuable material. Common substitutes for edge banding include face frames or molding. Edge banding can be made of different materials including polyvinyl chloride (PVC), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), acrylic, melamine, wood, or wood veneer.
Thermoplastic edge banding is produced with an extruder, a machine that consists of a loading system for raw materials, a screw inside a barrel that melts and transports the raw materials (plastics PVC, ABS, polypropylene (PP), polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and color pigments), and a dye through which the material is transported to shape the edge banding into the required size. After the edge banding is extruded, it can be texturized, printed, and lacquered to provide the required finish. The edge banding is then rolled and send to customers.

The Société Anonyme des Ateliers Edouard Mennig was a Belgic manufacturer of machine tools, especially for woodworking.
History
Edouard Mennig founded his company in Avenue Van Volxem 310-312 in Brussels. His wood working machines were driven by a series of pulleys and belts and used for many operations from chopping to crafting.

The Electric Smelting and Aluminum Company, founded as Cowles Electric Smelting and Aluminium Company, and Cowles Syndicate Company, Limited, was formed in the United States and England during the mid-1880s to extract and supply valuable metals. Founded by two brothers from Ohio, the Cowles companies are remembered for producing alloys in quantity sufficient for commerce. Their furnaces were electric arc smelters, one of the first viable methods for extracting metals.
The businesses of the era dramatically increased the supply of aluminium, a valuable element not found in nature in pure form, and reduced its price. The Cowles process was the immediate predecessor to the Hall-Héroult process—today in nearly universal use more than a century after it was discovered by Charles Martin Hall and Paul Héroult and adapted by others including Carl Josef Bayer. Because of the patent landscape, the Cowles companies found themselves in court. Judges eventually acknowledged their innovations many years after the companies formed, and one brother received two separate settlements.
Early years
Eugene H. Cowles and Alfred H. Cowles, sons of newspaper publisher Edwin Cowles of Cleveland, Ohio, built high temperature furnaces during the late 1880s in Lockport, New York, and in Stoke-upon-Trent in England, based on the furnace of Carl Wilhelm Siemens. Charles F. Mabery, at the time of what is today the Case School of Engineering, contributed expertise in chemistry.
The family had purchased a copper zinc mine on the Pecos River in New Mexico in 1883. Eugene that year designed a furnace to extract zinc from the mine's ores. Two young employees were testing four furnaces in a Cleveland laboratory by 1885. Their first plant was built to extract aluminium, in 1886 using hydropower from a tailrace of Niagara Falls on the Niagara River.
Adolphe Minet wrote a sympathetic assessment twenty years later in 1905 from the perspective of Paris. The Cowles furnace was electrochemical, one of two kinds of processes applied to producing aluminum during the 19th century, and belonged to the electrothermic group that includes Héroult (alloys), Brin, Bessemer, Stephanite and Moissan (carbide). Minet thought Cowles was the first great advance in electrometallurgy at least for many years, calling it a "practical" furnace yielding alloy up to 20 percent aluminum. The first was begun in 1884 and the best was tested in Cleveland in 1886. Minet gave the real credit though to other chemists who saw how to produce "pure aluminum".
William Frishmuth, who as the sole aluminium supplier in the United States built the Washington Monument's aluminum cap in 1884, was one among those who worried that "foreign capitalists" were about to control the world aluminium market.
Charles Martin Hall was a graduate of Oberlin College in Ohio who had discovered in February 1886 an electrolytic process for aluminum extraction. His patent application in July collided with Paul Héroult's application for the same idea, "electrolysis of alumina in cryolite" and for which Héroult had received the patent in France in April. Hall proved his February date and was awarded the patent in the U.S. Hall made a licensing agreement and worked with the Cowles at the facility in Lockport with the hopes of moving his ideas from the laboratory into production.
Cowles did not choose to use the Hall patent. Their reason is unclear—some in Lockport remember it as disagreement about "external heat and copper electrodes" and "internally heated furnace and carbon electrodes", and Alcoa culture remembers it as an attempt to "suppress his new process by buying him out". Hall left after one year, in July 1888, to found the Pittsburgh Reduction Company which today is named Alcoa.
Later years
In 1891 after Cowles began to advertise "pure aluminum" they were sued by the Pittsburgh Reduction Company. The judge announced his decision in January 1893, finding them to be infringing the patent of Hall and having gained knowledge of his process by hiring away a chemist named Hobbs who was the foreman in Pittsburgh. In 1903 the Cowles won a countersuit. The surviving brother Alfred chose to stop work on aluminum and Cowles received royalties and a US$1.35 million payment in settlement. The appeal said the patent application of Charles S. Bradley which Cowles had acquired in 1885 and Alcoa had acquired from Cowles in 1904 hinted at an internally rather than externally heated furnace.
The Cowles facility in England became part of British Aluminium in the late 1880s. In 1893, after Eugene's death, Maybery questioned a presentation that to him indicated the Cowles patents were infringed by the carborundum process of Edward Acheson (Acheson process). In 1900 Cowles received a $300,000 payment from the carborundum company. The judges' decision gave "priority broadly to the Messrs. Cowles for reducing ores and other substances by the incandescent method".
Influence
The achievements of Hall in the U.S. and of Héroult in Europe, and their influence on aluminum companies, some through Héroult's Société Electrometallurgique Française, have been called one of the greatest events in metallurgy. Over ten years, aluminum output in the U.S. increased by 100,000 times and its price dropped to about 2% of its cost before their discovery. Cowles engineered a separate venture and did not share that glory, but sometimes the brothers are credited with envisioning and promoting what was the beginning of electrical smelting on a large scale.

An electric arc furnace (EAF) is a furnace that heats material by means of an electric arc.
Industrial arc furnaces range in size from small units of approximately one-tonne capacity (used in foundries for producing cast iron products) up to about 400-tonne units used for secondary steelmaking. Arc furnaces used in research laboratories and by dentists may have a capacity of only a few dozen grams. Industrial electric arc furnace temperatures can reach 1,800 °C (3,300 °F), while laboratory units can exceed 3,000 °C (5,400 °F).
In electric arc furnaces, the material inside the furnace (referred to as a charge) is directly exposed to an electric arc, and the current from the electrode terminals passes through the charge material.
Arc furnaces differ from induction furnaces, which use eddy currents to heat the charge.
History
In the 19th century, a number of people had employed an electric arc to melt iron. The possibility of using an electric arc to melt metals was demonstrated by Vasily Vladimirovich Petrov in 1803. Sir Humphry Davy conducted an experimental demonstration in 1810; welding was investigated by William Haseldine Pepys in 1815; Pinchon attempted to create an electrothermic furnace in 1853; and, in 1878–79, Sir William Siemens took out patents for electric furnaces of the arc type.
The first successful and operational furnace was invented by James Burgess Readman in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1888 and patented in 1889. This was specifically for the creation of phosphorus.
Further electric arc furnaces were developed by Paul Héroult, of France, with a commercial plant established in the United States in 1907. The Sanderson brothers formed The Sanderson Brothers Steel Co. in Syracuse, New York, installing the first electric arc furnace in the U.S. This furnace is now on display at Station Square, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Initially "electric steel" produced by an electric arc furnace was a specialty product for such uses as machine tools and spring steel. Arc furnaces were also used to prepare calcium carbide for use in carbide lamps. The Stassano electric furnace is an arc type furnace that usually rotates to mix the bath. The Girod furnace is similar to the Héroult furnace.
While EAFs were widely used in World War II for production of alloy steels, it was only later that electric steelmaking began to expand. The low capital cost for a mini-mill—around US$140–200 per ton of annual installed capacity, compared with US$1,000 per ton of annual installed capacity for an integrated steel mill—allowed mills to be quickly established in war-ravaged Europe, and also allowed them to successfully compete with the big United States steelmakers, such as Bethlehem Steel and U.S. Steel, for low-cost, carbon steel "long products" (structural steel, rod and bar, wire, and fasteners) in the U.S. market.
When Nucor—now one of the largest steel producers in the US — entered the market for long steel products in 1969, they used a mini-mill with an EAF as its steelmaking furnace, soon followed by other manufacturers. While Nucor expanded rapidly in the Eastern US, the companies that followed them into mini-mill operations concentrated on local markets for long products, where the EAF allowed the plants to vary production according to local demand. This pattern was followed globally, with EAF steel production primarily used for long products, while integrated mills, using blast furnaces and basic oxygen furnaces, cornered the markets for "flat products"—sheet steel and heavier steel plate. In 1987, Nucor expanded into the flat products market, still using the EAF production method.
Construction
An electric arc furnace used for steelmaking consists of a refractory-lined vessel, usually water-cooled in larger sizes, covered with a retractable roof, and through which one or more graphite electrodes enter the furnace.
The furnace is primarily split into three sections:
the shell, which consists of the sidewalls and lower steel "bowl";
the hearth, which consists of the refractory that lines the lower bowl;
the roof, which may be refractory-lined or water-cooled, and can be shaped as a section of a sphere, or as a frustum (conical section). The roof also supports the refractory delta in its centre, through which one or more graphite electrodes enter.
The hearth may be hemispherical in shape, or in an eccentric bottom tapping furnace (see below), the hearth has the shape of a halved egg. In modern meltshops, the furnace is often raised off the ground floor, so that ladles and slag pots can easily be maneuvered under either end of the furnace. Separate from the furnace structure is the electrode support and electrical system, and the tilting platform on which the furnace rests. Two configurations are possible: the electrode supports and the roof tilt with the furnace, or are fixed to the raised platform.
A typical alternating current furnace is powered by a three-phase electrical supply, and therefore has three electrodes. Electrodes are round in section, and typically in segments with threaded couplings, so that as the electrodes wear, new segments can be added. The arc forms between the charged material and the electrode; the charge is heated both by current passing through the charge and by the radiant energy evolved by the arc. The electric arc temperature reaches around 3,000 °C (5,400 °F), thus causing the lower sections of the electrodes to glow incandescently when in operation. The electrodes are automatically raised and lowered by a positioning system, which may use either electric winch hoists or hydraulic cylinders. The regulating system maintains approximately constant current and power input during the melting of the charge, even though scrap may move under the electrodes as it melts. The mast arms holding the electrodes can either carry heavy busbars (which may be hollow water-cooled copper pipes carrying current to the electrode clamps) or be "hot arms", where the whole arm carries the current, increasing efficiency. Hot arms can be made from copper-clad steel or aluminium. Large water-cooled cables connect the bus tubes or arms with the transformer located adjacent to the furnace. The transformer is installed in a vault and is cooled by pump-circulated transformer oil, with the oil being cooled by water via heat exchangers.
The furnace is built on a tilting platform so that the liquid steel can be poured into another vessel for transport. The operation of tilting the furnace to pour molten steel is called "tapping". Originally, all steelmaking furnaces had a tapping spout closed with refractory that washed out when the furnace was tilted, but often modern furnaces have an eccentric bottom tap-hole (EBT) to reduce inclusion of nitrogen and slag in the liquid steel. These furnaces have a taphole that passes vertically through the hearth and shell, and is set off-centre in the narrow "nose" of the egg-shaped hearth. It is filled with refractory sand, such as olivine, when it is closed off. Modern plants may have two shells with a single set of electrodes that can be transferred between the two; one shell preheats scrap while the other shell is utilised for meltdown. Other DC-based furnaces have a similar arrangement, but have electrodes for each shell and one set of electronics.
AC furnaces usually exhibit a pattern of hot and cold-spots around the hearth perimeter, with the cold-spots located between the electrodes. Modern furnaces mount oxygen-fuel burners in the sidewall and use them to provide chemical energy to the cold-spots, making the heating of the steel more uniform. Additional chemical energy is provided by injecting oxygen and carbon into the furnace; historically this was done through lances (hollow mild-steel tubes) in the slag door, but now this is mainly done through wall-mounted injection units that combine the oxygen-fuel burners and the oxygen or carbon injection systems into one unit.
A mid-sized modern steelmaking furnace would have a transformer rated about 60,000,000 volt-amperes (60 MVA), with a secondary voltage between 400 and 900 volts and a secondary current in excess of 44,000 amperes. In a modern shop such a furnace would be expected to produce a quantity of 80 tonnes of liquid steel in approximately 50 minutes from charging with cold scrap to tapping the furnace. In comparison, basic oxygen furnaces can have a capacity of 150–300 tonnes per batch, or "heat", and can produce a heat in 30–40 minutes. Enormous variations exist in furnace design details and operation, depending on the end product and local conditions, as well as ongoing research to improve furnace efficiency. The largest scrap-only furnace (in terms of tapping weight and transformer rating) is a DC furnace operated by Tokyo Steel in Japan, with a tap weight of 420 tonnes and fed by eight 32 MVA transformers for 256 MVA total power.
Energy density
To produce a ton of steel in an electric arc furnace requires approximately 400 kilowatt-hours (1.44 gigajoules) per short ton or about 440 kWh (1.6 GJ) per tonne. The theoretical minimum amount of energy required to melt a tonne of scrap steel is 300 kWh (1.09 GJ) (melting point 1,520 °C (2,768 °F)). Therefore, a 300-tonne, 300 MVA EAF will require approximately 132 MWh of energy to melt the steel, and a "power-on time" (the time that steel is being melted with an arc) of approximately 37 minutes.
Electric arc steelmaking is only economical where there is plentiful, reliable electricity, with a well-developed electrical grid. In many locations, mills operate during off-peak hours when utilities have surplus power generating capacity and the price of electricity is less. This compares very favourably with energy consumption of global steel production by all methods estimated at some 5,555 kWh (20 GJ) per tonne (1 gigajoule is equal to approximately 278 kWh).
Operation
Scrap metal is delivered to a scrap bay, located next to the melt shop. Scrap generally comes in two main grades: shred (whitegoods, cars and other objects made of similar light-gauge steel) and heavy melt (large slabs and beams), along with some direct reduced iron (DRI) or pig iron for chemical balance. Some furnaces melt almost 100% DRI.
The scrap is loaded into large buckets called baskets, with "clamshell" doors for a base. Care is taken to layer the scrap in the basket to ensure good furnace operation; heavy melt is placed on top of a light layer of protective shred, on top of which is placed more shred. These layers should be present in the furnace after charging. After loading, the basket may pass to a scrap pre-heater, which uses hot furnace off-gases to heat the scrap and recover energy, increasing plant efficiency.
The scrap basket is then taken to the melt shop, the roof is swung off the furnace, and the furnace is charged with scrap from the basket. Charging is one of the more dangerous operations for the EAF operators. A lot of potential energy is released by the tonnes of falling metal; any liquid metal in the furnace is often displaced upwards and outwards by the solid scrap, and the grease and dust on the scrap is ignited if the furnace is hot, resulting in a fireball erupting.
In some twin-shell furnaces, the scrap is charged into the second shell while the first is being melted down, and pre-heated with off-gas from the active shell. Other operations are continuous charging—pre-heating scrap on a conveyor belt, which then discharges the scrap into the furnace proper, or charging the scrap from a shaft set above the furnace, with off-gases directed through the shaft. Other furnaces can be charged with hot (molten) metal from other operations.
After charging, the roof is swung back over the furnace and meltdown commences. The electrodes are lowered onto the scrap, an arc is struck and the electrodes are then set to bore into the layer of shred at the top of the furnace. Lower voltages are selected for this first part of the operation to protect the roof and walls from excessive heat and damage from the arcs. Once the electrodes have reached the heavy melt at the base of the furnace and the arcs are shielded by the scrap, the voltage can be increased and the electrodes raised slightly, lengthening the arcs and increasing power to the melt. This enables a molten pool to form more rapidly, reducing tap-to-tap times. Oxygen is blown into the scrap, combusting or cutting the steel, and extra chemical heat is provided by wall-mounted oxygen-fuel burners. Both processes accelerate scrap meltdown. Supersonic nozzles enable oxygen jets to penetrate foaming slag and reach the liquid bath.
An important part of steelmaking is the formation of slag, which floats on the surface of the molten steel. Slag usually consists of metal oxides, and acts as a destination for oxidised impurities, as a thermal blanket (stopping excessive heat loss) and helping to reduce erosion of the refractory lining. For a furnace with basic refractories, which includes most carbon steel-producing furnaces, the usual slag formers are calcium oxide (CaO, in the form of burnt lime) and magnesium oxide (MgO, in the form of dolomite and magnesite).
These slag formers are either charged with the scrap, or blown into the furnace during meltdown. Another major component of EAF slag is iron oxide from steel combusting with the injected oxygen. Later in the heat, carbon (in the form of coke or coal) is injected into this slag layer, reacting with the iron oxide to form metallic iron and carbon monoxide gas, which then causes the slag to foam, allowing greater thermal efficiency, and better arc stability and electrical efficiency. The slag blanket also covers the arcs, preventing damage to the furnace roof and sidewalls from radiant heat.
Once the initial scrap charge has been melted down, another bucket of scrap can be charged into the furnace, although EAF development is moving towards single-charge designs. The scrap-charging and meltdown process can be repeated as many times as necessary to reach the required heat weight – the number of charges is dependent on the density of scrap; lower-density scrap means more charges. After all scrap charges have completely melted, refining operations take place to check and correct the steel chemistry and superheat the melt above its freezing temperature in preparation for tapping.
More slag formers are introduced and more oxygen is blown into the bath, burning out impurities such as silicon, sulfur, phosphorus, aluminium, manganese, and calcium, and removing their oxides to the slag. Removal of carbon takes place after these elements have burnt out first, as they have a greater affinity for oxygen. Metals that have a poorer affinity for oxygen than iron, such as nickel and copper, cannot be removed through oxidation and must be controlled through scrap chemistry alone, such as introducing the direct reduced iron and pig iron mentioned earlier.
A foaming slag is maintained throughout, and often overflows the furnace to pour out of the slag door into the slag pit. Temperature sampling and chemical sampling take place via automatic lances. Oxygen and carbon can be automatically measured via special probes that dip into the steel, but for all other elements, a "chill" sample — a small, solidified sample of the steel — is analysed on an arc-emission spectrometer.
Once the temperature and chemistry are correct, the steel is tapped out into a preheated ladle through tilting the furnace. For plain-carbon steel furnaces, as soon as slag is detected during tapping the furnace is rapidly tilted back towards the deslagging side, minimising slag carryover into the ladle. For some special steel grades, including stainless steel, the slag is poured into the ladle as well, to be treated at the ladle furnace to recover valuable alloying elements. During tapping some alloy additions are introduced into the metal stream, and more fluxes such as lime are added on top of the ladle to begin building a new slag layer.
Often, a few tonnes of liquid steel and slag is left in the furnace in order to form a "hot heel", which helps preheat the next charge of scrap and accelerate its meltdown. During and after tapping, the furnace is "turned around": the slag door is cleaned of solidified slag, the visible refractories are inspected and water-cooled components checked for leaks, and electrodes are inspected for damage or lengthened through the addition of new segments. The taphole is filled with sand at the completion of tapping. For a 90-tonne, medium-power furnace, the whole process will usually take about 60–70 minutes from the tapping of one heat to the tapping of the next (the tap-to-tap time).
The furnace is completely emptied of steel and slag on a regular basis so that an inspection of the refractories can be made and larger repairs made if necessary. As the refractories are often made from calcined carbonates, they are extremely susceptible to hydration from water, so any suspected leaks from water-cooled components are treated extremely seriously, beyond the immediate concern of potential steam explosions. Excessive refractory wear can lead to breakouts, where the liquid metal and slag penetrate the refractory and furnace shell and escape into the surrounding areas.
Advantages for steelmaking
The use of EAFs allows steel to be made from a 100% scrap metal feedstock. This greatly reduces the energy required to make steel when compared with primary steelmaking from ores.
Another benefit is flexibility: while blast furnaces cannot vary their production by much and can remain in operation for years at a time, EAFs can be rapidly started and stopped, allowing the steel mill to vary production according to demand.
Although steelmaking arc furnaces generally use scrap steel as their primary feedstock, if hot metal from a blast furnace or direct-reduced iron is available economically, these can also be used as furnace feed.
As EAFs require large amounts of electrical power, many companies schedule their operations to take advantage of off-peak electricity pricing.
A typical steelmaking arc furnace is the source of steel for a mini-mill, which may make bars or strip product. Mini-mills can be sited relatively near the markets for steel products, so the transport requirements are less than for an integrated mill, which would commonly be sited near a harbor for better access to shipping.
Depending on the proportions of steel scrap, DRI and pig iron used, electric arc furnace steelmaking can result in carbon dioxide emissions as low as 0.6 tons CO2 per ton of steel produced, which is significantly lower than the conventional production route via blast furnaces and the basic oxygen furnace, which produces 2.9 tons CO2 per ton of steel produced.
Issues
Although the modern electric arc furnace is a highly efficient recycler of steel scrap, operation of an arc furnace shop can have adverse environmental effects. Much of the capital cost of a new installation will be devoted to systems intended to reduce these effects, which include:
Enclosures to reduce high sound levels
Dust collector for furnace off-gas
slag production
cooling water demand
Heavy truck traffic for scrap, materials handling, and product
Environmental effects of electricity generation
Since EAF steelmaking mainly use recycled materials like scrap iron and scrap steel, as their composition varies the resulting EAF slag and EAF dust can be toxic. EAF dust is collected by air pollution control equipment. It is called collected dust and usually contains heavy metals, such as zinc, lead and dioxins, etc. It is categorized as hazardous industrial waste and disposal is regulated.
Because of the very dynamic quality of the arc furnace load, power systems may require technical measures to maintain the quality of power for other customers; flicker and harmonic distortion are common power system side-effects of arc furnace operation.
Other electric arc furnaces
For steelmaking, direct current (DC) arc furnaces are used, with a single electrode in the roof and the current return through a conductive bottom lining or conductive pins in the base. The advantage of DC is lower electrode consumption per ton of steel produced, since only one electrode is used, as well as less electrical harmonics and other similar problems. The size of DC arc furnaces is limited by the current carrying capacity of available electrodes, and the maximum allowable voltage. Maintenance of the conductive furnace hearth is a bottleneck in extended operation of a DC arc furnace.
In a steel plant, a ladle furnace (LF) is used to maintain the temperature of liquid steel during processing after tapping from EAF or to change the alloy composition. The ladle is used for the first purpose when there is a delay later in the steelmaking process. The ladle furnace consists of a refractory roof, a heating system, and, when applicable, a provision for injecting argon gas into the bottom of the melt for stirring. Unlike a scrap melting furnace, a ladle furnace does not have a tilting or scrap-charging mechanism.
Electric arc furnaces are also used for production of calcium carbide, ferroalloys, and other non-ferrous alloys, and for production of phosphorus. Furnaces for these services are physically different from steel-making furnaces and may operate on a continuous, rather than batch, basis. Continuous-process furnaces may also use paste-type, Søderberg electrodes to prevent interruptions from electrode changes.
Such a furnace is known as a submerged arc furnace, because the electrode tips are buried in the slag/charge, and arcing occurs through the slag, between the matte and the electrode. The casing and casing fins of the electrode melt the electrode paste through electrical current passing through the electrode casing and heat from the furnace. A steelmaking arc furnace, by comparison, arcs in the open. The key is the electrical resistance, which is what generates the heat required: the resistance in a steelmaking furnace is the atmosphere, while in a submerged-arc furnace, the slag (or charge) supplies the resistance. The liquid metal formed in either furnace is too conductive to form an effective heat-generating resistance.
Cooling methods
Smaller arc furnaces may be adequately cooled by circulation of air over structural elements of the shell and roof, but larger installations require intensive forced cooling to maintain the structure within safe operating limits. The furnace shell and roof may be cooled either by water circulated through pipes which form a panel, or by water sprayed on the panel elements. Tubular panels may be replaced when they become cracked or reach their thermal stress life cycle.
Spray cooling is the most economical and is the highest efficiency cooling method. A spray cooling piece of equipment can be relined almost endlessly. Equipment that lasts 20 years is the norm. While a tubular leak is immediately noticed in an operating furnace due to the pressure loss alarms on the panels, at this time there exists no immediate way of detecting a very small volume spray cooling leak. These typically hide behind slag coverage and can hydrate the refractory in the hearth, leading to a break out of molten metal or in the worst case a steam explosion.
Plasma arc furnace
A plasma arc furnace (PAF) uses plasma torches instead of graphite electrodes. Each of these torches has a casing with a nozzle and axial tubing for feeding a plasma-forming gas (either nitrogen or argon) and a burnable cylindrical graphite electrode within the tubing. Such furnaces can be called plasma arc melt (PAM) furnaces; they are used extensively in the titanium-melting industry and similar specialty metal industries.
Vacuum arc remelting
Vacuum arc remelting (VAR) is a secondary remelting process for vacuum refining and manufacturing of ingots with improved chemical and mechanical homogeneity.
In critical military and commercial aerospace applications, material engineers commonly specify VIM-VAR steels. VIM means vacuum induction melted and VAR means vacuum arc remelted. VIM-VAR steels become bearings for jet engines, rotor shafts for military helicopters, flap actuators for fighter jets, gears in jet or helicopter transmissions, mounts or fasteners for jet engines, jet tail hooks and other demanding applications.
Most grades of steel are melted once and are then cast or teemed into a solid form prior to extensive forging or rolling to a metallurgically-sound form. In contrast, VIM-VAR steels go through two more highly purifying melts under vacuum. After melting in an electric arc furnace and alloying in an argon oxygen decarburization vessel, steels destined for vacuum remelting are cast into ingot molds. The solidified ingots then head for a vacuum induction melting furnace. This vacuum remelting process rids the steel of inclusions and unwanted gases while optimizing the chemical composition.
The VIM operation returns these solid ingots to the molten state in the contaminant-free void of a vacuum. This tightly controlled melt often requires up to 24 hours. Still enveloped by the vacuum, the hot metal flows from the VIM furnace crucible into giant electrode molds. A typical electrode is about 15 feet (5 m) tall and will be in various diameters. The electrodes solidify under vacuum.
For VIM-VAR steels, the surface of the cooled electrodes must be ground to remove surface irregularities and impurities before the next vacuum remelt. Then the ground electrode is placed in a VAR furnace. In a VAR furnace, the steel gradually melts drop-by-drop in the vacuum-sealed chamber. Vacuum arc remelting further removes lingering inclusions to provide superior steel cleanliness and remove gases like oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen. Controlling the rate at which these droplets form and solidify ensures a consistency of chemistry and microstructure throughout the entire VIM-VAR ingot, making the steel more resistant to fracture or fatigue. This refinement process is essential to meet the performance characteristics of parts like a helicopter rotor shaft, a flap actuator on a military jet, or a bearing in a jet engine.
For some commercial or military applications, steel alloys may go through only one vacuum remelt, namely the VAR. For example, steels for solid rocket cases, landing gears, or torsion bars for fighting vehicles typically involve one vacuum remelt.
Vacuum arc remelting is also used in production of titanium and other metals which are reactive or in which high purity is required.

An electric charcoal starter is an electric heating element designed for igniting charcoal without kindling. It may be simply a heater loop that is inserted into a pile of charcoal, or may include a pot for holding the charcoal. Electric starters are "virtually fool-proof", but do require a source of electricity.

Elgiloy (Co-Cr-Ni Alloy) is a "super-alloy" consisting of 39-41% cobalt, 19-21% chromium, 14-16% nickel, 11.3-20.5% iron, 6-8% molybdenum, 1.5-2.5% manganese and 0.15% max. carbon.
It is used to make springs that are corrosion resistant and exhibit high strength, ductility, and good fatigue life. These same properties led to it being used for control cables in the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird airplane, as they needed to cope with repeated stretching and contracting.
Elgiloy meets specifications AMS 5876, AMS 5833, and UNS R30003.
Due to its chemical composition, Elgiloy is highly resistant to sulfide stress corrosion cracking and pitting, and can operate at temperatures up to 454 °C.
Elgiloy is a trade name for this super alloy. Phynox is another trade name for the same super alloy.

Elias "Elie" Eliopoulos was a Greek smuggler who was, alongside his brothers George and Ananassius (Nassos), one of the most prominent and important organized crime members and drug traffickers of the early 20th century, maintaining connections with the Greek mafia, Corsican mafia, Turkish mafia, Italian-American Mafia, and Italian Mafia. The brothers eventually became known as the Drug Barons of Europe, taking the highest positions in Unione Corse in Marseille and Paris in the 1920's and 30's. Elias Eliopoulos was the head of the family. Their organized narcotics and drugs network spanned the globe, from China to California via Afghanistan, Turkey, London, and New York. Historians suggest that when the Eliopoulos Brothers were at their peak in the 1930's, they were the largest narcotics and drugs network in the entire world. Eliopoulos was made one of the most wanted people by many of the world's leading narcotics bureaus, including the Central Narcotics Bureau of the Egyptian Government, and the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN), and was especially hunted by Malcolm Delevingne, Harry J. Anslinger, and Russell Pasha. He mentored many of the more famous gangsters that followed, including August Del Gracio, Jacques Voignier, and Paul Carbone. In effect, the Drug Barons of Europe are considered the spiritual grandfathers of Carbone's French Connection. In a 1943 Life magazine article, journalist Gerard Piel described the brothers’ criminal enterprise as functioning like a “central bank and clearing house” for a large portion of the world’s illicit trade in opium, morphine, and heroin.
When describing the network of the Drug Barons of Europe, the French magazine Détective wrote:"From Japan to New York, via Marseille! From the skyscrapers of Broadway to the plains of Manchuria! From the docks of Hamburg to the pyramids of Egypt! From the Bosphorous to the Champs-Élysées. There is something for everyone. The setting is as vast as the universe.
Now animate this famous selection of images with the magical names of the modern age: export, import, orders, bills of lading, invoices, telegrams, banks, palaces, and telephone! All of this will find its place here.
Boats, sleeping cars and planes will not be too much either. Everything that circulates in space, everything that connects countries to each other, across borders, will be used: this great black and white liner that goes up the Red Sea; this express with blue cars that runs along the Nishava pass in Bulgaria; this plane that flies over the stone spires of Strasbourg; this fast ship that, with all lights out, glides over the sleeping waters..."
Early life
Elias Eliopoulos was born in Piraeus, Greece, and was the son of a prominent Greek diplomat who was stationed in Turkey for some time.
Criminal empire (c. 1912 – 1943)
Rise
Elias Eliopoulos got his start in the world of organized crime by selling weapons to the Greek army during World War I. During the war, he encountered two minor arms dealers in the town of Thessaloniki. The men were by the names of Louis-Théodore Lyon and Carlos Fernández Bácula. In 1918, Eliopoulos "tested the waters in France," and made his first recorded narcotics deal, but shortly afterward wound up in prison for a month.
At the conclusion of the war, Eliopoulos migrated to Paris, where in 1926, he got back into the world of drugs and narcotics. At the height of the Great Depression, Elie Eliopoulos was facing financial difficulties and met with David Gourievidis (also known as David Gourevitch), a Russian émigré who had settled in Greece. Gourievidis took him under his wing and introduced him to the profitability of the drug trade in China, where he claimed to have connections. The two traveled to Tianjin, a key commercial hub in northern China, and later returned with a more ambitious plan.
On their second visit to Tianjin, Gourievidis and Eliopoulos connected with Jean Voyatzis, a fellow Greek and the leader of a local smuggling ring operating from the French Concession. Eliopoulos's contribution to the emerging enterprise was his access to manufactured narcotics such as heroin and morphine. He established himself in Paris and secured deals with two licensed French producers, the Comptoir des alcaloïdes and the Société industrielle de chimie organique, to serve as suppliers. He gained the appearance of legitimacy by presenting himself as a businessman and associating with elite social circles. Eliopoulos's organization reportedly included a wide range of collaborators: sailors, smugglers, former diplomats, and members of organized crime groups. His distribution network in the United States allegedly involved known criminal figures such as Arthur "Dutch Schultz" Flegenheimer and Louis "Lepke" Buchalter.
The famous restauranteur Louis Lyon, however, was wary of a Greek family taking over his town. Before the Eliopoulos brothers got to town, he had designs to become the boss of Paris, in what was only known then as the "Franco-Italian-American" organization. Lyon was a proud Frenchman, and he didn't want a foreigner taking his future empire. But when Elias Eliopoulos managed to secure his sources and establish his manufacturing plants, Lyon's power status was challenged. Within five years, Eliopoulos would be running Paris with a personal net worth of 70 million dollars, dwarfing in global scale the neighborhood gang that Lyon managed, and Lyon would become one of his trusted couriers. Lyon, thanks to Eliopoulos' mentorship and guidance (though the police forces of Europe didn't know his real name) would come to be known as "Roi de La Droga," (The King of Drugs).
Marcel Montarro for Détective wrote:"Elie Eliopoulos is the prototype of these invulnerable drug kings. He was the boss, and if it dare say, the godfather of Lyon, and in the world of illicit trafficking, is symbolic in this regard... Elie Eliopoulos was truly the world's first drug kingpin."George, Nassos, and Elie Eliopoulos, gained prominence in European high society. Known for their extravagant lifestyle, the brothers were fixtures at elite resorts across the French and Italian Rivieras. Elie Eliopoulos was the most prominent of the three and the head of the family. In Paris, he cultivated a public image as a well-dressed man-about-town and part of the modern aristocracy, often seen in Parisian cafés with his signature gold-handled cane. He had a taste for luxury and all of the items that came with it, including champagne, opera, gambling, and lavish dinners.
Beginning in 1928, Eliopoulos arranged for opium shipments from China to France, sometimes using legal means and at other times concealing the cargo in mislabeled containers (e.g., marked as "tea"). He sold this opium to the manufacturers at discounted rates, and the refined narcotics were then smuggled back to Tianjin or directed toward other markets, including the United States.
By 1928, the brothers were supplying high-grade narcotics to prominent American drug distributors, including organized crime figures such as Charles “Lucky” Luciano. According to historians at the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the Eliopoulos brothers pioneered a tactic later known as the “double deal,” in which, as soon as they felt their buyers were growing too quickly, they informed authorities about them in order to eliminate future competition.
Gerard Piel for Life wrote:The Eliopoulos brothers very quickly adapted themselves to the new circumstances of their business. One New York broker failed to come through on a transaction and was cultivating his Broadway reputation with the proceeds; they arranged, across the Atlantic, to have three Corsicans give him a public beating in a speakeasy. At the same remote distance they regularly negotiated the betrayal of large prepaid shipments to the U. S. customs. They went so far as to ruin their best U. S. dealers, the Bernstein brothers, who had grown too prosperous on a six-day schedule of shipments between Cherbourg and New York. Samuel Bernstein is still in jail.In 1930, the Eliopoulos network financed a covert drug laboratory in Turkey. Their trafficking route spanned from Turkey and China to France, and from there to the United States. That same year, authorities intercepted a shipment aboard the SS Alesia from Istanbul to Brooklyn, seizing 17,500 cans labeled “Furs,” each concealing an ounce of morphine. Despite this, Elias, operating from Athens, expressed confidence that he was beyond the reach of American law enforcement. He boasted to an FBN agent the details of his Chinese contacts and projected an annual volume of narcotics reaching the United States in multiple tons.
At the peak of his operations, Elie Eliopoulos was exporting an estimated 300 kilograms (approximately 660 pounds) of refined narcotics each month to China alone. These shipments reportedly earned him around $50,000 per month, transferred from Tianjin through American Express. Within a single year, Eliopoulos had established a wide-reaching network of agents operating in numerous countries, including China, France, the United States, Egypt, Turkey, Greece, the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, and Italy.
Eliopoulos’s influence extended into official circles. In Paris, he secured protection from a police inspector known as "Zani" (Inspector Martin of the Préfecture de police), whom he paid initially 5,000 and later 10,000 French francs monthly. In exchange, Eliopoulos agreed to refrain from selling narcotics within France and offered intelligence on rival traffickers.
Despite the scale of his operations, Eliopoulos initially avoided prosecution. His case eventually attracted the attention of the League of Nations’ Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs (OAC), following a formal complaint by FBN Commissioner Harry Anslinger. While the French government later expressed regret over the situation, Eliopoulos remained effectively immune from legal consequences during this period.
Decline
The downfall of Elie Eliopoulos's international trafficking operation began in 1931, triggered by a series of destabilizing events. His partnership with David Gourievidis unraveled, possibly due to a personal dispute or Gourievidis's growing concerns about police scrutiny. Especially due to the fact that he lost a volume of opium in Shanghai worth £50,000, in an operation that he suspected was not accidental. In response, Gourievidis approached the Paris authorities, and news of the network reached the press. The resulting publicity compromised Eliopoulos’s protection from the Paris police. Eliopoulos had paid off the French police, and was given protection by high ranking officials, so movement was not immediately made on their part. Eventually, however, Louis-Théodore Lyon saw weakness in his organization, and wanted him out of the way. Lyon paid the French police even more money toward that end. The gangsters who had invented the double deal had been double dealt twice themselves.
At the same time, American mobster August "Little Augie" Del Gracio, a known client of the Eliopoulos network, was arrested in Hamburg while receiving a shipment of approximately 250 kilograms (550 pounds) of morphine disguised in machinery parts. The incident appeared to involve a failed double-cross: Del Gracio's shipment had reportedly been diverted and declared stolen, only for him to be approached by an intermediary offering the same quantity of morphine from an identical source. The investigation eventually led police from Del Gracio to a woman in Berlin, and from her to an Afghan national connected to Eliopoulos’s network.
The decisive blow came with the seizure of a coded notebook belonging to Jean Voyatzis, a key figure in the network. Voyatzis had been under surveillance and was intercepted while traveling from China to Greece. British officials in Cairo, alerted to his movements, informed Egyptian authorities. As Voyatzis traveled from Port Said to Alexandria, his baggage, transported separately, was thoroughly searched by Russell Pasha’s narcotics unit. Among his possessions was a small notebook containing encrypted correspondence and detailed information on the trafficking operation.
Described by officials as more valuable than "gold or rubies," the notebook revealed the identities of network members operating in China and Japan, the Eliopoulos brothers, Gourievidis, various buyers, transport contacts, and industrial suppliers. Armed with this intelligence, authorities were able to intercept further drug shipments.
Eliopoulos, having briefly been detained in Mannheim in connection with the Hamburg case (but released due to insufficient evidence), fled to Athens. In a surprising move, he contacted Russell Pasha directly, offering to disclose the full extent of the operation in a private meeting with an appointed agent. He expressed willingness to cooperate with investigators, resulting in a wave of prosecutions in France. The most prominent was the 1938–1939 trial of Louis-Théodore Lyon, which attracted public attention due to the high-profile nature of the witnesses, including figures from aristocracy, the arts, and religious communities. One ploy involved smuggling heroin disguised as "sacred sand" sent with religious books.
Despite the disruption of Eliopoulos’s operation, subsequent reports suggested that elements of his network continued to function under new leadership. The broader impact of the trade was visible in cities across North America, where the narcotics trade persisted.
Officially considered "retired," in the business after being released from prison, Eliopoulos and his brothers went into the nascent Greek mining industry, notably investing in bauxite, barite, bentonite, pearlite, and gold mines. Their largest mining company was called Bauxites Parnasse S.A., in which they owned many bauxite deposits near Mount Parnassus.
When the Nazis invaded Greece in 1941, Eliopoulos allegedly reported to the Nazis that his former mentor, David Gourisvidis, was a "Jewish traitor." The Nazis acted accordingly. However, the brothers George and Elie soon realized they could not stay in Europe while it was occupied by the Nazis, and they fled to the United States, where they were promptly arrested by FBN special agents George Hunter White, Charlie Dryar, and Charlie Siragusa, as the brothers arrived at customs. They were convincted in Brooklyn, but were out of prison three months later, their conviction being overturned do to the fact that most of the evidence submitted to the court was beyond the statue of limitations. Nasso managed to evade capture.
Louis Lyon, meanwhile, who had joined the French Resistance, arranged the assassination of his former underling Paul Carbone. This forced Carbone's lieutenant, François Spirito, to flee to Spain. Spirito soon became the new head of the French Connection.
Mining empire (1947 – death)
By 1947, the brothers had returned to postwar Greece and resumed operations in the mining sector. However, during the postwar reconstruction period, American financial and industrial aid (especially programs focused on securing strategic materials) was primarily directed toward the Greek Chemical Products and Fertilizers Company of the Bodosakis Group and the Skalistris Group’s bauxite mines. In 1950, Charles Siragusa was dispatched to Greece to investigate Eliopoulos, who had applied for Marshall Plan funding to develop a gold mine in northern Greece—an area also known for poppy cultivation. Upon his arrival in Athens, Siragusa established contact with CIA station chief Tom Karamessines. Siragusa provided intelligence on Eliopoulos’s background, while Karamessines facilitated local outreach. As a result of their cooperation, reports of Iliopoulos’s criminal history surfaced in the Greek press. The ensuing scandal led to the denial of his Marshall Plan request. As a result, the Eliopoulos brothers' Bauxites Parnasse S.A. remained inactive into 1955.
In the aftermath, Eliopoulos shifted to stock market manipulation and arms trafficking to Israel.
The landscape changed in 1960 with the founding of the Pechiney alumina and aluminum plant, which significantly revitalized the Greek bauxite industry. Nevertheless, before the refinery became operational, concerns were raised about the premature extraction and export of bauxite. In February 1962, Aluminium de Grèce, a Pechiney subsidiary, entered into a long-term contract with the Barlos Brothers Company to secure 4.725 million tons of bauxite between 1965 and 1983. Following government intervention, the company also reached an agreement with Bauxites Parnasse to purchase 175,000 tons of bauxite annually for 30 years at competitive rates.
By 1970, the company had grown to supply 60% of Greece's external exports of bauxite.
Their parent company, Elipoulos Brothers Limited, eventually changed its name to MOTODYNAMICS S.A.

An Ellingham diagram is a graph showing the temperature dependence of the stability of compounds. This analysis is usually used to evaluate the ease of reduction of metal oxides and sulfides. These diagrams were first constructed by Harold Ellingham in 1944. In metallurgy, the Ellingham diagram is used to predict the equilibrium temperature between a metal, its oxide, and oxygen — and by extension, reactions of a metal with sulfur, nitrogen, and other non-metals. The diagrams are useful in predicting the conditions under which an ore will be reduced to its metal. The analysis is thermodynamic in nature and ignores reaction kinetics. Thus, processes that are predicted to be favourable by the Ellingham diagram can still be slow.
Thermodynamics
Ellingham diagrams are a particular graphical form of the principle that the thermodynamic feasibility of a reaction depends on the sign of ΔG, the Gibbs free energy change, which is equal to ΔH − TΔS, where ΔH is the enthalpy change and ΔS is the entropy change.
The Ellingham diagram plots the Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) for each oxidation reaction as a function of temperature. For comparison of different reactions, all values of ΔG refer to the reaction of the same quantity of oxygen, chosen as one mole O (1⁄2 mol O2) by some authors and one mole O2 by others. The diagram shown refers to 1 mole O2, so that e.g. the line for the oxidation of chromium shows ΔG for the reaction 4⁄3 Cr(s) + O2(g) → 2⁄3 Cr2O3(s), which is 2⁄3 of the molar Gibbs energy of formation ΔGf°(Cr2O3, s).
In the temperature ranges commonly used, the metal and the oxide are in a condensed state (solid or liquid), and oxygen is a gas with a much larger molar entropy. For the oxidation of each metal, the dominant contribution to the entropy change (ΔS) is the removal of 1⁄2 mol O2, so that ΔS is negative and roughly equal for all metals. The slope of the plots ⁠
d
Δ
G
/
d
T
−
Δ
S
{\displaystyle d\Delta G/dT=-\Delta S}
⁠ is therefore positive for all metals, with ΔG always becoming more negative with lower temperature, and the lines for all the metal oxides are approximately parallel. Since these reactions are exothermic, they always become feasible at lower temperatures. At a sufficiently high temperature, the sign of ΔG may invert and become positive, and the oxide can spontaneously reduce to the metal.
For oxidation of carbon, the red line is for the formation of CO: C(s) + 1⁄2 O2(g) → CO(g) with an increase in the number of moles of gas, leading to a positive ΔS and a negative slope. The blue line for the formation of CO2 is approximately horizontal, since the reaction C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g) leaves the number of moles of gas unchanged so that ΔS is small.
As with any chemical reaction prediction based on purely thermodynamic grounds, a spontaneous reaction may be very slow if one or more stages in the reaction pathway have very high activation energies EA.
If two metals are present, two equilibria have to be considered. The oxide with the more negative ΔG will be formed and the other oxide will be reduced.
The Ellingham diagram is usually plotted at an absolute pressure of 1 bar. However, in some applications, where vacuum conditions are required, the diagram can also be generated at lower pressure conditions. This type of diagram can be used for applications in vacuum metallurgy and astrometallurgy. Lower pressures reduce the stability of oxides shifting the lines on the diagram to the left.
Diagram features
Curves in the Ellingham diagrams for the formation of metallic oxides are basically straight lines with a positive slope. The slope is proportional to ΔS, which is approximately constant with temperature.
The lower the position of a metal's line in the Ellingham diagram, the greater is the stability of its oxide. For example, the line for Al (oxidation of aluminium) is found to be below that for Fe (formation of Fe2O3) meaning that aluminium oxide is more stable than iron(III) oxide.
Stability of metallic oxides decreases with increase in temperature. Highly unstable oxides like Ag2O and HgO easily undergo thermal decomposition.
The formation free energy of carbon dioxide (CO2) is almost independent of temperature, while that of carbon monoxide (CO) has negative slope and crosses the CO2 line near 700 °C. According to the Boudouard reaction, carbon monoxide is the dominant oxide of carbon at higher temperatures (above about 700 °C), and the higher the temperature (above 700 °C) the more effective a reductant (reducing agent) carbon is.
If the curves for two metals at a given temperature are compared, the metal with the lower Gibbs free energy of oxidation on the diagram will reduce the oxide with the higher Gibbs free energy of formation. For example, metallic aluminium can reduce iron oxide to metallic iron, the aluminium itself being oxidized to aluminium oxide. (This reaction is employed in thermite.)
The greater the gap between any two lines, the greater the effectiveness of the reducing agent corresponding to the lower line.
The intersection of two lines implies an oxidation-reduction equilibrium. Reduction using a given reductant is possible at temperatures above the intersection point where the ΔG line of that reductant is lower on the diagram than that of the metallic oxide to be reduced. At the point of intersection the free energy change for the reaction is zero, below this temperature it is positive and the metallic oxide is stable in the presence of the reductant, while above the point of intersection the Gibbs energy is negative and the oxide can be reduced.
Reducing agents
In industrial processes, the reduction of metal oxides is often effected by a carbothermic reaction, using carbon as a reducing agent. Carbon is available cheaply as coal, which can be rendered to coke. When carbon reacts with oxygen it forms the gaseous oxides carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide, so the thermodynamics of its oxidation is different from that for metals: its oxidation has a more negative ΔG with the higher temperatures (above 700 °C). Carbon can thus serve as reducing agent. Using this property, reduction of metals may be performed as a double redox reaction at relatively low temperature.
The diagram can be used to estimate the temperature at which a redox reaction becomes possible. An example is the reduction of zinc oxide by graphite: ZnO + C → Zn + CO. The diagram shows that the free energy of formation of 2 CO becomes more negative than that of 2 ZnO when heated to about 1000°C. This is (approximately) the minimum temperature at which ZnO can be reduced by C.
Use of Ellingham diagrams
The main application of Ellingham diagrams is in the extractive metallurgy industry, where it helps to select the best reducing agent for various ores in the extraction process, purification and grade setting for steel manufacturing. It also helps to guide the purification of metals, especially the removal of trace elements. The direct reduction process for making iron rests firmly on the guidance of Ellingham diagrams, which show that hydrogen by itself can reduce iron oxides to the metal.
Reducing agent for haematite
In iron ore smelting, haematite gets reduced at the top of the furnace, where temperature is in the range 600 – 700 °C. The Ellingham diagram indicates that in this range carbon monoxide acts as a stronger reducing agent than carbon since the process
2 CO + O2 → 2 CO2
has a more-negative free energy change than the process:
2 C + O2 → 2 CO.
In the upper part of the blast furnace, haematite is reduced by CO (produced by oxidation of coke lower down at the bottom of blast furnace, at higher temperature) even in the presence of carbon – though this is mainly because the kinetics for gaseous CO reacting with the ore are better.
Reducing agent for chromic oxide—carbon cannot be used
The Ellingham curve for the reaction 2C(s) + O2(g) → 2CO(g) slopes down and falls below the curves for all the metals. Hence, carbon can normally act as a reducing agent for all metal oxides at very high temperatures. But chromium formed at these temperatures reacts with carbon to form its carbide, which gives undesirable properties to the chromium metal obtained. Hence, for high temperature reduction of chromic oxide, carbon cannot be used.
Aluminothermic process
The Ellingham curve for aluminium lies below the curves of most metals such as chromium, iron, etc. This fact indicates that aluminium can be used as the reducing agent for oxides of all these metals. This result is illustrated as follows:
The free energies of formation of chromium(III) oxide and aluminium oxide per mole of oxygen consumed are -541 kJ and -827 kJ respectively. The processes are:
The second equation minus the first equation gives:
Δ
G
0
−
287
kJ
{\displaystyle {\ce {\Delta G^0 = -287 kJ}}}
So aluminium oxide is more stable than chromium oxide (at least at normal temperatures, and in fact all the way up to the decomposition temperatures of the oxides). Since the Gibbs free energy change is negative, aluminium can reduce chromium oxide.
In pyrometallurgy, aluminium is used as a reducing agent in the aluminothermic process, also known as the thermite reaction, to extract chromium and manganese by reduction of their oxides.
Extensions to other gas-phase reactions
The concept of plotting the free energies of reaction of various elements with a given gas-phase reactant may be extended beyond oxidation reactions. The original paper by Ellingham explicitly to the reduction of both oxygen and sulfur by metallurgical processes, and anticipated the use of such diagrams for other compounds, including chlorides, carbides, and sulfates. The concept is generally useful for studying the comparative stability of compounds across a range of partial pressures and temperatures. The construction of an Ellingham diagram is especially useful when studying the stability of compounds in the presence of a reductant. Ellingham diagrams are now available for bromides, chlorides, fluorides, hydrides, iodides, nitrides, oxides, sulfides, selenides, and tellurides.

The Elmenteitan culture was a prehistoric lithic industry and pottery tradition with a distinct pattern of land use, hunting and pastoralism that appeared and developed on the western plains of Kenya, East Africa during the Pastoral Neolithic c.3300-1200 BP. It was named by archaeologist Louis Leakey after Lake Elmenteita (also Elementaita), a soda lake located in the Great Rift Valley, about 120 km (75 mi) northwest of Nairobi.
History of research
The Elmenteitan was first described by Louis Leakey from excavations at Gamble's Cave (the type site) in 1931 and Njoro River Cave in 1938. Leakey had noticed a locally distinct cluster of the lithic industry and a universal pottery tradition in a restricted area on the plains west of the central Great Rift Valley and at the Mau Escarpment.
Sites and society
Elmenteitan sites are found between the central Rift Valley and the western Lake Victoria Basin of Kenya. The occupants of all these sites used obsidian sourced from Mount Eburu. They left behind distinctive lithic and ceramic traditions and practiced primarily cremation burial. This contrasts with the contemporaneous SPN pastoral tradition whose sites are found across a wider part of Kenya and Tanzania. Occupants of these sites used a variety of obsidian sources, had greater diversity in material culture, and mainly buried their dead in cairns. These findings suggest that the heterogeneous SPN category likely encompasses multiple groups.
Artifacts and characteristics
At Elmenteitan sites, lithic assemblages are distinguished by a high percentage of long symmetrical two-edged obsidian blades. These blades, which sum up to 15-20cm in length (among the largest in the Later Stone Age in Eastern Africa), were used unmodified and also served as blanks for a great variety of smaller microlithic tools.
Typical Elmenteitan artifact assemblages also include ceramic bowls and shallow stone vessels. Ceramic vessels are mainly undecorated. Several rare, but very distinctive ornamental designs such as irregular punctuation and rim millings have also been found. Occasionally small bowls with out-turned rims, handles with holes or horizontal lugs have been discovered as well.
Domestic cattle and small stock were raised and herded in combination with hunting, fishing and foraging. Patterns and degree of subsistence economy varied greatly depending on location and local and temporal climate. Regular cremation of the dead took place in caves (e.g. Egerton Cave, Keringet Caves). Njoro River Cave, first excavated in 1938 by Mary Leakey, served as a mass-burial site. Associated finds include beads, blades, stone bowls, palettes and pottery vessels.
Physical anthropology
Instances of dental avulsion in some individuals from Elmenteitan burial sites has led to associations with the early spread of Southern Nilotic speaking groups into south-western Kenya. The exact direction from which they entered southern Kenya remains unclear. Recent genetic analysis of the ancient remains of Elmenteitan has proven that the population of the Savanna Pastoral Neolithic were also responsible for the pastoralist Elmenteitan culture that lived in the Rift Valley during the same period.

Emiran culture was a culture that existed in the Levant (Lebanon, Palestine, Syria, Israel, Jordan, Egypt and Arabia) between the Middle Paleolithic and the Upper Paleolithic periods. It is the oldest known of the Upper Paleolithic cultures and remains an enigma as it transitionally has no clear African progenitor. This has led some scholars to conclude that the Emiran is indigenous to the Levant. However, some argue that it reflects broader technological trends observed earlier in North Africa, at older sites like Taramsa 1 in Egypt, "which contains modern human remains dated to 75,000 years ago".
Emiran period
Emiran culture may have developed from the local Mousterian without rupture, keeping numerous elements of the Levalloise-Mousterian, together with the locally typical Emireh point. The Emireh point is the type tool of stage one of the Upper Paleolithic, first identified in the Emiran culture. Numerous stone blade tools were used, including curved knives similar to those found in the Châtelperronian culture of Western Europe.
The Emiran eventually evolved into the Ahmarian, and later the Levantine Aurignacian culture (formerly called Antelian), still of Levalloise tradition but with some Aurignacian influences.
According to Dorothy Garrod, the Emireh point, known from several sites in Palestine, is the hallmark of this culture.
Relationships
"Levantine Aurignacian", from the Levant, is a type of blade technology very similar to the European Aurignacian, following chronologically the Emiran and Early Ahmarian in the same area of the Near East, and closely related to them.

The English and Australian Copper Company was a South Australian based company, established in 1851 from the transfer of assets of the Patent Copper Company (formerly based in Swansea, South Wales). Formed as a joint stock company, with smelting works at Spitty (South Wales) and Kooringa (Burra, South Australia), it also maintained wharves at Port Adelaide and Port Wakefield, where copper ore was largely supplied by the South Australian Mining Association (SAMA).
The Spitty copper works were disposed of in 1855, and most of the company’s operations were transferred to South Australia. In 1861, a copper smelting works was opened in Port Adelaide. However, due to the reduced production of copper ore in the colony, the company’s Kooringa works suspended operations in 1869, and in 1872, a portion of the smelting plant and machinery was transferred to Newcastle, New South Wales, where the Lambton Works opened.
In 1918, the English and Australian Copper Company dissolved and ceased operations as a business.

An eolith (from Ancient Greek ἠώς (ēṓs), meaning "dawn", and λίθος (líthos), meaning "stone") is a flint nodule that appears to have been crudely knapped. Eoliths were once thought to have been artifacts, the earliest stone tools, but are now believed to be geofacts (stone fragments produced by fully natural geological processes such as glaciation).
The first eoliths were collected in Kent by Benjamin Harrison, an English amateur naturalist and archaeologist, in 1885 (though the name "eolith" was not coined until 1892, by J. Allen Browne). Harrison's discoveries were published by Sir Joseph Prestwich in 1891, and eoliths were generally accepted to have been crudely made tools, dating from the Pliocene (5.333 million to 2.58 million years ago). Further discoveries of eoliths in the early 20th century – in the Red Crag Formation and Norwich Crag Formation of East Anglia by J. Reid Moir and E. Ray Lankester and in continental Europe by Aimé Louis Rutot and H. Klaatsch – were taken to be evidence of human habitation of those areas before the oldest known fossils. The English finds helped to secure acceptance of the (hoax) remains of Piltdown Man.
Because eoliths were so crude, concern was raised that they were indistinguishable from the natural processes of erosion. Marcellin Boule, a French archaeologist, published an argument against the artefactual status of eoliths in 1905, and Samuel Hazzledine Warren provided confirmation of Boule's view after carrying out experiments on flints.

The equivalent carbon content concept is used on ferrous materials, typically steel and cast iron, to determine various properties of the alloy when more than just carbon is used as an alloyant, which is typical. The idea is to convert the percentage of alloying elements other than carbon to the equivalent carbon percentage, because the iron-carbon phases are better understood than other iron-alloy phases. Most commonly this concept is used in welding, but it is also used when heat treating and casting cast iron.
Steel
In welding, equivalent carbon content (C.E) is used to understand how the different alloying elements affect hardness of the steel being welded. This is then directly related to hydrogen-induced cold cracking, which is the most common weld defect for steel, thus it is most commonly used to determine weldability. Higher concentrations of carbon and other alloying elements such as manganese, chromium, silicon, molybdenum, vanadium, copper, and nickel tend to increase hardness and decrease weldability. Each of these elements tends to influence the hardness and weldability of the steel to different magnitudes, however, making a method of comparison necessary to judge the difference in hardness between two alloys made of different alloying elements. There are two commonly used formulas for calculating the equivalent carbon content. One is from the American Welding Society (AWS) and recommended for structural steels and the other is the formula based on the International Institute of Welding (IIW).
The AWS states that for an equivalent carbon content above 0.40% there is a potential for cracking in the heat-affected zone (HAZ) on flame cut edges and welds. However, structural engineering standards rarely use CE, but rather limit the maximum percentage of certain alloying elements. This practice started before the CE concept existed, so just continues to be used. This has led to issues because certain high strength steels are now being used that have a CE higher than 0.50% that have brittle failures.
C
E
%
C
+
%
Mn
+
%
Si
6
+
%
Cr
+
%
Mo
+
%
V
5
+
%
Cu
+
%
Ni
15
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Mn}}+\%{\text{Si}}}{6}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cr}}+\%{\text{Mo}}+\%{\text{V}}}{5}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cu}}+\%{\text{Ni}}}{15}}}
The other and most popular formula is the Dearden and O'Neill formula, which was adopted by IIW in 1967. This formula has been found suitable for predicting hardenability in a large range of commonly used plain carbon and carbon-manganese steels, but not to microalloyed high-strength low-alloy steels or low-alloy Cr-Mo steels. The formula is defined as follows:
C
E
%
C
+
%
Mn
6
+
%
Cr
+
%
Mo
+
%
V
5
+
%
Cu
+
%
Ni
15
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Mn}}}{6}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cr}}+\%{\text{Mo}}+\%{\text{V}}}{5}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cu}}+\%{\text{Ni}}}{15}}}
For this equation the weldability based on a range of CE values can be defined as follows:
The Japanese Welding Engineering Society adopted the critical metal parameter (Pcm) for weld cracking, which was based on the work from Ito and Bessyo, is:
P
c
m
%
C
+
%
Si
30
+
%
Mn
+
%
Cu
+
%
Cr
20
+
%
Ni
60
+
%
Mo
15
+
%
V
10
+
5
B
{\displaystyle Pcm=\%{\text{C}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Si}}}{30}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Mn}}+\%{\text{Cu}}+\%{\text{Cr}}}{20}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Ni}}}{60}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Mo}}}{15}}+{\frac {\%{\text{V}}}{10}}+5B}
If some of the values are not available, the following formula is sometimes used:
C
E
%
C
+
%
Mn
6
+
1
20
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Mn}}}{6}}+{\frac {1}{20}}}
The carbon equivalent is a measure of the tendency of the weld to form martensite on cooling and to suffer brittle fracture. When the carbon equivalent is between 0.40 and 0.60 weld preheat may be necessary. When the carbon equivalent is above 0.60, preheat is necessary, postheat may be necessary.
The following carbon equivalent formula is used to determine if a spot weld will fail in high-strength low-alloy steel due to excessive hardenability:
C
E
%
C
+
%
Mn
6
+
%
Cr
+
%
Mo
+
%
Zr
10
+
%
Ti
2
+
%
Cb
3
+
%
V
7
+
U
T
S
900
+
h
20
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Mn}}}{6}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cr}}+\%{\text{Mo}}+\%{\text{Zr}}}{10}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Ti}}}{2}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cb}}}{3}}+{\frac {\%{\text{V}}}{7}}+{\frac {UTS}{900}}+{\frac {h}{20}}}
Where UTS is the ultimate tensile strength in ksi and h is the strip thickness in inches. A CE value of 0.3 or less is considered safe.
A special carbon equivalent was developed by Yurioka, which could determine the critical time in seconds Δt8-5 for the formation of martensitic in the Heat Affected Zone (HAZ) in low-carbon alloy steels. The equation is given as:
C
E
∗
%
C
∗
+
%
Mn
3.6
+
%
Cu
20
+
%
Ni
9
+
%
Cr
5
+
%
Mo
4
{\displaystyle CE*=\%{\text{C}}*+{\frac {\%{\text{Mn}}}{3.6}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cu}}}{20}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Ni}}}{9}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Cr}}}{5}}+{\frac {\%{\text{Mo}}}{4}}}
where:
%
C
∗
{
5
%
C
for
%
C
≤
0.30
%
1
6
%
C
for
%
C
≥
0.30
%
{\displaystyle \%{\text{C}}*={\begin{cases}5\%{\text{C}}&{\mbox{ for }}\%{\text{C}}\leq 0.30\%\\{\frac {1}{6}}\%{\text{C}}&{\mbox{ for }}\%{\text{C}}\geq 0.30\%\end{cases}}}
Then the critical time length in seconds Δt8-5 can be determined as follows:
log
10
⁡
Δ
t
8
−
5
2.69
C
E
∗
{\displaystyle \log _{10}\Delta t_{8-5}=2.69CE*}
Cast iron
For cast iron the equivalent carbon content (CE) concept is used to understand how alloying elements will affect the heat treatment and casting behavior. It is used as a predictor of strength in cast irons because it gives an approximate balance of austenite and graphite in final structure. A number of formulas are available to determine the CE in cast irons, where an increasing number of elements are included:
C
E
%
C
+
0.33
(
%
Si
)
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+0.33\left(\%{\text{Si}}\right)}
C
E
%
C
+
0.33
(
%
Si
+
%
P
)
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+0.33\left(\%{\text{Si}}+\%{\text{P}}\right)}
C
E
%
C
+
0.33
(
%
Si
)
+
0.33
(
%
P
)
−
0.027
(
%
Mn
)
+
0.4
(
%
S
)
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+0.33\left(\%{\text{Si}}\right)+0.33\left(\%{\text{P}}\right)-0.027\left(\%{\text{Mn}}\right)+0.4\left(\%{\text{S}}\right)}
C
E
%
C
+
0.28
(
%
Si
)
+
0.303
(
%
P
)
−
0.007
(
%
Mn
)
+
0.033
(
%
Cr
)
+
0.092
(
%
Cu
)
+
0.011
(
%
Mo
)
+
0.054
(
%
Ni
)
{\displaystyle CE=\%{\text{C}}+0.28\left(\%{\text{Si}}\right)+0.303\left(\%{\text{P}}\right)-0.007\left(\%{\text{Mn}}\right)+0.033\left(\%{\text{Cr}}\right)+0.092\left(\%{\text{Cu}}\right)+0.011\left(\%{\text{Mo}}\right)+0.054\left(\%{\text{Ni}}\right)}
This CE is then used to determine if the alloy is hypoeutectic, eutectic, or hypereutectic; for cast irons the eutectic is 4.3% carbon. When casting cast iron this is useful for determining the final grain structure; for example, a hypereutectic cast iron usually has a coarse grain structure and large kish graphite flakes are formed. Also, there is less shrinkage as the CE increases. When heat treating cast iron, various CE samples are tested to empirically determine the correlation between CE and hardness. The following is an example for induction hardened gray irons:

In lithic analysis (a subdivision of archaeology), an eraillure is a flake removed from a lithic flake's bulb of force, which is a lump left on the ventral surface of a flake after it is detached from a core of tool stone during the process of lithic reduction. The mechanics of eraillure formation are related to the propagation of a Hertzian cone of force through the cryptocrystalline matrix of the stone, but the particulars are poorly understood. Eraillures usually form only when a hammerstone is used for lithic reduction, and then only occasionally; use of 'soft' hammer fabricators made from bone, antler, and wood produce different flake characteristics but may also produce an eraillure in rare cases.

Ercol is a British furniture manufacturer. It was established by Lucian Ercolani and his sons in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire and is now based in Princes Risborough.
History
Origins
The company was founded in 1920 as Furniture Industries by Italian-born Lucian Ercolani (1888–1976), who had trained as a furniture designer at Shoreditch Technical Institute, and made his first piece of furniture in 1907. "Ercol" was first registered as a trademark in 1928.
World War II
At the beginning of the Second World War, the Ercol factory was repurposed to contribute to the war effort, initially making tent pegs from pieces of wood too small for other uses. Over the course of the war Ercol produced 36 million such pegs. In 1944, Ercol was contracted by the government's Board of Trade to produce 100,000 low-cost Windsor chairs under the Utility Furniture Scheme. Windsor chairs were constructed with a bentwood frame and an arched back supporting delicate spindles, using the steam bending of English elm. Before this, elm was not generally used for furniture because of its tendency to warp; Ercolani developed a new drying process for the wood to combat this. This method allowed the chair to be assembled from 14 pre-formed components, and mechanization meant that a chair could be made every 20 seconds.
Post-war
In 1946, Ercol exhibited its bentwood furniture at the "Britain Can Make It" exhibition, held at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. In 1947, the first production-line Windsor chair, and other pieces from the range of Windsor furniture, went on sale. Ercol's mass-produced furniture found a good market in post-war Britain, which demanded smaller pieces with simpler lines than their chunky pre-war counterparts. Ercol furniture was exhibited at the 1951 Festival of Britain, as one of the latest styles in furniture design and manufacture.
21st century
In 2002, Ercol moved to a new facility, purpose built for the company, in Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire, where it produces furniture made from North American elm and European ash, beech, oak and walnut. The company sources fabrics from mills in Italy and Belgium, offering a choice of over 100 different options for its upholstery. Because Ercol's upholstery is designed with solid wood frames, it is possible to replace worn-out cushions and other components, prolonging the life of the products. Ercol offers a reCover service to supply replacement cushions.
Awards
Ercol and its employees have been awarded a number of Guild Marks by the Furniture Makers' Company, including:
15 Bespoke Guild Marks
a Design Guild Mark in 2010 for the Treviso desk by Matthew Hilton
a Design Guild Mark in 2015 for the Svelto round stacking stool by Lisa Gould Sandall
Activities
Ercol partnered with design magazine Wallpaper for an installation at the 2009 London Design Festival – a modern interpretation of the Chair Arch, which was exhibited in the Central Courtyard of the V&A Museum in September 2009.
In May 2023, Grown in Britain, an organization dedicated to safekeeping British forests, partnered with Ercol to launch a line of furniture including the Marino chair and Pebble nest.

An ersatz good (UK: AIR-zats, US: AIR-zahts, both also UR-) is a substitute good, especially one that is considered inferior to the good it replaces. It has particular connotations of wartime usage.
Etymology
Ersatz (German: [ɛʁˈzats] ) is a German word meaning substitute or replacement. Although it is used as an adjective in English, it is a noun in German. In German orthography noun phrases formed are usually represented as a single word, forming compound nouns such as Ersatzteile ("spare parts") or Ersatzspieler ("substitute player"). While ersatz in English generally means that the substitution is of unsatisfactory or inferior quality compared with the "real thing", in German, there is no such implication: e.g., Ersatzteile 'spare parts' is a technical expression without any implication about quality, Kaffeeersatz 'coffee substitute' is a drink from something other than coffee beans, and Ersatzzug 'replacement train' performs a comparable service. The term for inferior substitute in German would be Surrogat, which is cognate to the English word "surrogate".
Historical examples
World War I
In the opening months of World War I, replacement troops for battle-depleted German infantry units were drawn from lesser-trained Ersatz Corps, which were less effective than the troops they replaced.
Another example of the word's usage in Germany exists in the German naval construction programs at the beginning of the 20th century. In this context, the phrasing "Ersatz (ship name)" indicates that a new, larger or more capable ship was a replacement for an ageing or lost vessel. Because German practice was not to reveal the name of a new ship until its launch, this meant that the ship was known by its "Ersatz (ship name)" throughout its construction. At the end of World War I, the last three ships of the planned Mackensen class of battlecruisers were redesigned and initially known simply as the Ersatz Yorck class, since the first ship was considered to be a replacement for the lost armored cruiser Yorck.
The Allied naval blockade of Germany limited maritime commerce with Germany, forcing Germany and Austria-Hungary to develop substitutes for products such as chemical compounds and provisions. More than 11,000 ersatz products were sold in Germany during the war. Patents for ersatz products were granted for 6000 varieties of beer, wine and lemonade; 1000 kinds of soup cubes; 837 types of sausage and 511 assortments of coffee.
Ersatz products developed in Germany and Austria-Hungary during this time included:
synthetic rubber Kautschuk produced from petroleum for rubber
benzene for heating oil (coal gas)
industrial lubricants made by extracting oils from coal tar and brown-coal slags
synthetic camphor for imported natural camphor
nitrate crepe paper made from cellulose for gun cotton
glycerin from sugar rather than fats
gypsum-yielded sulphur
pigeon guano used to make fertilizer
flowers and weeds processed to make alcohol for ammunition
rosins and gums extracted from coal derivatives
tea composed of roasted barley, grasses, wild flowers, ground raspberry leaves or catnip
coffee substitute using roasted acorns, chicory and beechnuts (stretched with caramel-flavoured raw sugar and beet flower later in the war)
butter replaced by curdled milk, sugar and food colouring
cooking oil replaced by a mixture of beets, carrots, turnips and spices
salad oil was 99% mucilage
eggs replaced by yellow-coloured corn or potato flour
ground European beetles (cockchafers) and linden wood replaced fats
sausage made of water, plant fibres, animal scraps and blood (the infamous 'war sausage' which was equated to 'a mouthful of sawdust')
bouillon cubes made 70–90% of salt rather than meat extract
wheat flour stretched by adding potato flour and powdered hay
chocolates and cocoa replaced by ground cocoa shells and mixed pure pepper
oil and sunflower 'cakes' replaced corn and oats as horse feed
rapeseed, poppy and mustard 'cakes' replaced green feed for cattle
paper, peat, reeds, bulrushes and free-growing stinging nettle fibres replaced cotton in textiles
wood and paper used for shoe soles
Germany also stretched its supply of petrol with 'gasohol' (Benzolspiritus), which by today's standards would be classed as E25 petrol, consisting of 75% petrol and 25% distilled alcohol, likely ethanol.
World War II
In World War II, Ersatzbrot (substitute bread) made of potato starch, frequently stretched with extenders such as sawdust, was furnished to soldiers as Kommissbrot, a dark German bread baked from rye and other flours used for military rations, and also to prisoners of war. One recipe reportedly discovered in the "Food Providing Ministry" (Reichsnährstand) in Berlin, labeled "(Top Secret) Berlin 24.X1 1941", contained 50% bruised rye grain, 20% sliced sugar beets, 20% "tree flour" (sawdust), and 10% minced leaves and straw.
During the siege of Leningrad, its citizens were given ersatz flour instead of actual wheat flour (of which there was an extremely limited supply then) by the Soviet authorities. The lack of proper food with any nutrition meant that the city residents not only starved but became vulnerable to deadly illnesses and diseases (such as dysentery) owing to their weakened physical conditions. As a result, the word ersatz entered as a pejorative into Russian and other Slavic languages.
In Britain, this was additionally popularised as an adjective from the experiences of thousands of U.S., British, and other English-speaking combat personnel, primarily airmen, who were captured in the European Theater of Operations during World War II. These Allied prisoners of war were given ersatz goods such as Ersatzkaffee, an inferior Getreidekaffee or "grain coffee" as a coffee substitute by their German captors.
Eastern Bloc
In the Eastern Bloc, many agricultural goods could not be produced domestically, such as tea, coffee, nuts, and citrus fruits. These were generally imported from abroad with scarce foreign currency reserves, or inferior substitutes were produced domestically. In 1977, the East German coffee crisis resulted in the introduction of many coffee substitutes, which were generally rejected by the population. Replacements for orangeat and succade were made from candied carrot and unripe tomatoes.
Other
A study of conditions in the Southern United States during the American Civil War is called Ersatz in the Confederacy.
Effectiveness
When presented with a choice of ersatz, one tends to prefer the generic version of the brand rather than an entirely different product. Specifically one that most closely resembles the original and meets the same goal.
For instance, a person who desires a gourmet chocolate is more likely to choose another, less expensive chocolate as a substitute than a different kind of dessert or snack. Because such "within-category" substitutes are easier to compare to the desired good, however, those that are inferior are less effective than "cross-category" substitutes that fulfill the same goal. People are more able to notice their inferiority during consumption, which leads them to be less satisfying than goal-derived substitutes from different taxonomic categories.
During the First World War in Germany and Austria-Hungary, people succumbed to sickness from the consumption of ersatz goods. In Austria, the term "Vienna sickness" was coined after malnutrition from such goods was linked to a cause of the tuberculosis epidemic (10,000 reported cases).
In Germany, Princess Blücher suffered from influenza in 1916, suggesting that she was suffering from "ersatz illness". She writes: "everyone is feeling ill from too many chemicals in the hotel food. I don't believe that Germany will ever be starved out, but she will be poisoned out first with these substitutes."

An exhibition mine is a mine that is accessible to the public and contains exhibitions about that particular mine and about the coal industry in general, effectively doubling as a museum.
Notable exhibition mines
Cape Breton Miners Museum - Glace Bay, Nova Scotia
El Chiflón del Diablo - Arauco Basin, Chile
Fell Exhibition Slate Mine - Trier, Germany
Phillips-Sprague Mine - on the National Register of Historic Places in New River Park, Beckley, West Virginia
Pocahontas Exhibition Coal Mine - Pocahontas, Virginia, United States
Salt Cathedral of Zipaquirá - Altiplano Cundiboyacense, Colombia
Wieliczka Salt Mine – Wieliczka, southern Poland

Expanded clay (exclay) or lightweight expanded clay aggregate (LECA) is a lightweight aggregate made by heating clay to around 1,200 °C (2,190 °F) in a rotary kiln. The heating process causes gases trapped in the clay to expand, forming thousands of small bubbles and giving the material a porous structure. LECA has an approximately round or oblong shape due to circular movement in the kiln and is available in different sizes and densities. LECA is used to make lightweight concrete products and other uses.
History
LECA was developed in Kansas City, Missouri around 1917, produced in a rotary kiln following the method from a patented expanded aggregate known as Haydite (which was used in the construction of SS Selma, an ocean-going ship launched in 1919). Following this, a series of aggregates known as Gravelite, Perlite, Rocklite, etc. were developed in the USA.
Afterwards;it was expanded to Europe as first started production in Denmark(copenhagen and later in Røsnæs), Finland, Germany, Holland (the Netherlands) and the UK.
Characteristics
LECA is usually produced in different sizes and densities from 0.1 millimetres (0.004 in) up to 25 millimetres (1.0 in), commonly 0–4 mm, 4–10 mm, 10–25 mm and densities of 250, 280, 330, and 510 kg/m3. LECA boulder is the biggest size of LECA with 100–500 mm size and 500 kg/m3 density.
Some characteristics of LECA are lightness, thermal insulation by low thermal conductivity coefficient (as low as 0.097 W/mK), soundproofing by high acoustic insulation, moisture impermeability, being incompressible under permanent pressure and gravity loads, not decomposing in severe conditions, fire resistance, a pH of nearly 7, freezing and melting resistance, easy movement and transportation, lightweight backfill and finishing, reduction of construction dead load and earthquake lateral load, being perfect sweet soil for plants, and as a material for drainage and filtration.
Uses
Common uses are in concrete blocks, concrete slabs, geotechnical fillings, lightweight concrete, water treatment, hydroponics, aquaponics and hydroculture.
LECA is a versatile material and is utilized in an increasing number of applications. In the construction industry, it is used extensively in the production of lightweight concrete, blocks and precast or incast structural elements (panels, partitions, bricks and light tiles). LECA used in structural backfill against foundations, retaining walls, bridge abutments etc., in addition, it can reduce earth pressure by 75% compared with conventional materials, and also increases ground stability while reducing settlement and land deformation. LECA can drain the surface water and groundwater to control groundwater pressure. LECA grout can be used for flooring (finishing) and roofing with thermal and sound insulation.
LECA is also used in water treatment facilities for the filtration and purification of municipal wastewater and drinking water as well as in other filtering processes, including those for dealing with industrial wastewater and fish farms.
LECA has many uses in horticulture, agriculture, and landscapes. Using LECA helps to alter soil mechanics. Using LECA provides many benefits across horticulture. It's commonly used as a growing medium in hydroponics systems since blended with other growing mediums such as soil and peat, it can improve compaction resistance, and drainage, retain water during periods of drought, insulate roots during frost, and provide roots with increased oxygen levels promoting very vigorous growth. LECA can be mixed with heavy soil to improve its aeration and drainage.
In the horticultural practice of hydroponics, LECA is a favored medium for growing plants within; the round shape provides excellent aeration at the root level, while the LECA clay pieces themselves become saturated with water and plant food, thus giving the roots a consistent supply of both. So-called semi-hydroponics or passive hydroponics (also called "semi-hydro") is a popular, simplified method of hydroponics, most commonly utilized for houseplants and tropical species. A plant is potted in solely LECA (preferably in a container with multiple air holes on the sides and bottom, like an orchid pot) and placed into a second, sealed container, in which a "nutrient reservoir" of water and plant food is maintained. Only the very bottom of the pot needs to touch this reservoir; the LECA, being porous by nature, gradually wicks moisture and nutrients up and becomes saturated, allowing the plant to feed and drink at a consistent rate.
One of the main differences between semi-hydroponics and more advanced hydroponics is the nutrients and water--whether they are consistently being delivered or whether they are sitting beneath each plant, gradually needing to be replaced before evaporating or becoming stagnant. Other differences are elements such as the facilities, the equipment, the types of plants being grown and why, and the consistency of water and nutrient delivery. Hydroponics is often favored by farmers and growers of edible crops on a larger scale. LECA can be used successfully in these settings. Semi-hydroponics is much more popular with individual plant collectors, bearing in mind the need to flush out and replenish the plants' nutrient reservoirs periodically (approx. every 7-10 days); more advanced systems provide constantly flowing, filtered, nutrient-enhanced water over the plants' roots, which typically drains into another reservoir for recycling and reusing.

Experimental archaeometallurgy is a subset of experimental archaeology that specifically involves past metallurgical processes most commonly involving the replication of copper and iron objects as well as testing the methodology behind the production of ancient metals and metal objects. Metals and elements used primarily as alloying materials, such as tin, lead, and arsenic, are also a part of experimental research.
Experimental archaeometallurgy as a sub-discipline
The theory behind experimental archaeology comes from the new archaeology technique of the 1950s to use modern day examples in the form of experiments and ethnologies as analogues to past processes. Experimental archaeometallurgy is considered a part of general experimental archaeology and is rarely separated in the literature and as such, many of the principles stay the same while there is a greater focus on a single subject.
Archaeometallurgy works as a good field for experimental reproduction because of the evidence that is provided from excavation is a good starting point for reconstruction. Metallurgical remains provide a durable product that has relatively durable evidence of production methods such as slag and refractory ceramic remains. Experimentation comes in a varied amount of forms including object replication, system replication, behavioral replication, and process replication.
Research problems
Archaeometallurgical experimentation typically takes place in controlled laboratories or tries to remain as authentic as possible by being conducted using only the materials and facilities that were available to the subjects whose technology is trying to be reconstructed. Regardless of location though, the experimentation is always conducted under a different mindset outside the context of what was originally intended. A constant problem in any type of experimental archaeology is the cultural distance between the archaeologist and the individual who originally was involved with the metallurgy. This difference in mindset may lead to misunderstandings in the processes behind the metallurgy. Second to this, not all experiments are successful and it is hard to determine if this is the fault of the techniques used or the individual conducting the experiment.
Connection with ethnoarchaeology
Ethnoarchaeology has been widely used in conjunction with experimental archaeology using the techniques of modern peoples as analogues to the processes of the past. The attempted use of ethnology in archaeology tries to counteract the cultural distance of the researcher from process by changing the context of experimentation. Africa has played a large role in reconstructing copper smelting and bloomery iron furnaces as there are still several places that practice a workshop production of iron. Killick has been one such archaeologist to utilize surviving iron production in Africa to gain further insight into how other furnaces from around the world may have been constructed.
Mining
Mining is among the first steps of producing metal and as such is one of the foci of experimental archaeometallurgy. However, experimental research on mining is mostly limited to firesetting and the reproduction and use of mining tools.
Firesetting
Firesetting is the process of exposing a rock face to high temperatures to induce cracking, spalling, and an overall increase to the brittleness of the rock in order to make it more susceptible to mining processes. Understanding the process of firesetting has been a crucial element to the development of an archaeological history of mining and as such has been the subject of several experiments to reproduce the technique. Typically firesetting experiments are conducted by setting a fire next to a predetermined rock face while taking measurements on the amount of and type of fuel used, temperatures of the fire and rock face, the amount of spalling before and after excavation, as well as the amount of time required for the different procedures. This examination allows for several possible inferences to be made about the mining process including the total amount of fuel a mining site may have needed to complete and its effects on the surrounding environment as well as how mining labor could have been organized. One outcome of firesetting experimentation is the realization that the quenching, or dousing the rock face with water after heating, is not necessary to making the rock face easier to excavate. The quenching process had been a standard step in most experiments with firesetting, but now more research is necessary to answer the new question of why quenching was used if it was not effective.
Mining tools
Experimental reconstruction of tools used in prehistoric mining is often written about in conjunction with the tools use after the process of firesetting. The experimental mining tool assemblage are primarily made up of hammerstones and antler picks that are reconstructed using willow and hazel sticks, rawhide, and hemp string to implement various hafting techniques and methods of utilization.
Smelting
Smelting or the reduction of an ore to its metallic state is the primary source of experimentation in archaeometallurgy. In its simplest form smelting can be accomplished by placing an ore sample between two pieces of combusting charcoal in an oxygen reducing atmosphere with a compressed air source to feed the combustion and result in temperatures high enough to smelt metal. But to reach this final metallic state several things need to be done first including the processing of the ore to remove waste or gangue material, the possible roasting of the ore, the smelting of the ore, and then there is the possibility of refining the metal through a series of remelts. Then, through chemical or microscopic analysis, the products of the smelt are analyzed and compared with the findings of archaeological excavation in order to examine the likelihood of various manufacturing processes.
Copper and its alloys
The first recorded experimental work in copper was conducted by Cushing in 1894 in order to demonstrate that copper plate found in Hopewell mounds in Ohio could have been produced by the Hopewell people and not come from European trade. In his experiments, Cushing used antler and stone tools to cut out sheets of copper and puncture round holes in them through a method of pressure and grinding. In addition to the copper sheet experiments, Cushing also conducted smelting experiments reconstructed from finding at Salado Valley, Arizona pueblo excavations to reproduce copper artifacts.
Iron
The experimental archaeometallurgy of iron is more recent then that of copper in that for the most part was not widely studied until the mid-20th century. This can be attributed to the modern smelting of wrought iron still being produced as an industry up until 1900, when the last of the large-scale production shut down, along with the belief among researchers that many of the same techniques had been passed down since the inception of bloomery iron. A static technique simply was not the case as the technology used to make Roman Era iron showed the use of a technology that had long since disappeared. That being said research in iron has progressed beyond that of copper due to the greater amount of historic text and surviving remains of iron production.
Several experiments have taken place to reproduce bloomery iron. Clough presents an average example of experimental ironwork with the reproduction possible Roman bowl furnaces. Clough found the reproduction bowl furnaces to be inefficient by producing small amounts of poor quality iron, which, when compared to excavated findings of much larger better quality blooms of iron led to the conclusion that bowl furnaces were not used by the Romans.
Precious metals
Experimental work on precious metals is limited by the cost of experimentation and by the well-understood technical processes involved. Gold and silver are produced in a similar manner to copper with the additional process of cupellation. Platinum is mostly an issue in South America and is typically left out from experimental archaeometallurgy because of its traditional use as a powdered metal as an additive to produce alloys.
Areas of research
Several sets of data can be collected during the experimental process of smelting including fuel consumption rates, the effects of variation in furnace airflow,
temperatures, production time, and chemical composition.
Replication of techniques
The replication of technique in copper production includes a vast number of possibilities in trying to recreate what has been found through archaeological excavation. Tylecote and Boydell have experimented on possible explanations for the levels of iron found in certain copper objects and the possibility of removing excess iron through the re-melting of the copper. Crew has also done experimental work on iron to show possible loss in iron mass due to the processes involved with working the metal from bloom to billet which concluded with a loss of 75% in slag, impurities, and iron metal.
Alloys
Alloys that are not bronze and brass have had a limited representation in the literature for archaeometallurgy. This is mostly due to lack of interest or evidence in the archaeological record. Arsenical copper is one such limited research topic with some experimental work done by Pollard, Thomas, and Williams. Through several experimental smeltings of copper ores including arsenic, Pollard, Thomas, and Williams found that arsenic in copper is retained in higher levels when a lower smelting temperature is used, implying that arsenical copper may have been the result of early smelting technologies where temperatures were unable to pass a certain point.
Lead experimentation has been limited mostly because of its ease in production. Ore containing lead can be easily smelted, re-melted, and worked and as such there is not much difficulty in understanding how past societies may have produced lead. When lead experiments are conducted, they are done much in the same fashion as copper smelting experiments taking notes on quantitative elements such as completion time, airflow rates, fuel usage, and the resulting amount and composition of metal from the smelt. In addition, lead is a toxic element and special care has to take place in order to experiment with it, which makes limitations on the experiments.
Other aspects
Artifact replication plays an important role in comparing artifact use. Often objects are made not just to prove a manufacturing process or to sit in a display case, but to show that a given object will show signs of wear that are similar to those present in the archaeological record. Roberts and Ottaway conducted such experimental reconstructions by casting bronze axes using them in a preconceived manner and then comparing the results against known archaeological remains. Results gathered from such experimentation have found that objects have comparable wear patterns and there are European socketed axes that were deposited used as well as unused. Tool mark identification can also go the opposite ways using experimental reconstruction to show the difference between various material media and the wear patterns they leave. Greenfield gives one such experiment where steel, bronze, and stone tool marks on bone are all researched and examples are given for how they might be seen in the archaeological record.
Energy consumption and efficiency is another topic of interest in archaeometallurgy. Tree felling and land clearing experiments involving comparison of stone, bronze, and steel axes are popular with a number of archaeologists In these types of experiments, factors such as time spent and oxygen intake of the researchers are taken into account to try to find similarities in past life ways use of energy.

Extractive metallurgy is a branch of metallurgical engineering studying the process and methods of extraction of metals from their natural mineral deposits. The field is a materials science, covering all aspects of the types of ore, washing, concentration, separation, chemical processes and extraction of pure metal and their alloying to suit various applications, sometimes for direct use as a finished product, but more often in a form that requires further working to achieve the given properties to suit the applications.
The field of ferrous and non-ferrous extractive metallurgy have specialties that are generically grouped into the categories of mineral processing, hydrometallurgy, pyrometallurgy, and electrometallurgy based on the process adopted to extract the metal. Several processes are used for extraction of the same metal depending on occurrence and chemical requirements. Extractive metallurgy in the context of the field of space resource extraction is referred to as astrometallurgy.
Mineral processing
Mineral processing begins with beneficiation, consisting of initially breaking down the ore to required sizes depending on the concentration process to be followed, by crushing, grinding, sieving etc. Thereafter, the ore is physically separated from any unwanted impurity, depending on the form of occurrence and or further process involved. Separation processes take advantage of physical properties of the materials. These physical properties can include density, particle size and shape, electrical and magnetic properties, and surface properties. Major physical and chemical methods include gravitational or magnetic separation, froth flotation etc., whereby the impurities and unwanted materials are removed from the ore and the base ore of the metal is concentrated, meaning the percentage of metal in the ore is increased. This concentrate is then either processed to remove moisture or else used as is for extraction of the metal or made into shapes and forms that can undergo further processing, with ease of handling.
Ore bodies often contain more than one valuable metal. Tailings of a previous process may be used as a feed in another process to extract a secondary product from the original ore. Additionally, a concentrate may contain more than one valuable metal. That concentrate would then be processed to separate the valuable metals into individual constituents.
Hydrometallurgy
Hydrometallurgy is concerned with processes involving aqueous solutions to extract metals from ores. The first step in the hydrometallurgical process is leaching, which involves dissolution of the valuable metals into the aqueous solution and or a suitable solvent. After the solution is separated from the ore solids, the extract is often subjected to various processes of purification and concentration before the valuable metal is recovered either in its metallic state or as a chemical compound. This may include precipitation, distillation, adsorption, and solvent extraction. The final recovery step may involve precipitation, cementation, or an electrometallurgical process. Sometimes, hydrometallurgical processes may be carried out directly on the ore material without any pretreatment steps. More often, the ore must be pretreated by various mineral processing steps, and sometimes by pyrometallurgical processes.
Pyrometallurgy
Pyrometallurgy involves high temperature processes where chemical reactions take place among gases, solids, and molten materials. Solids containing valuable metals are treated to form intermediate compounds for further processing or converted into their elemental or metallic state. Pyrometallurgical processes that involve gases and solids are typified by calcining and roasting operations. Processes that produce molten products are collectively referred to as smelting operations. The energy required to sustain the high temperature pyrometallurgical processes may derive from the exothermic nature of the chemical reactions taking place. Typically, these reactions are oxidation, e.g. of sulfide to sulfur dioxide . Often, however, energy must be added to the process by combustion of fuel or, in the case of some smelting processes, by the direct application of electrical energy.
Ellingham diagrams are a useful way of analysing the possible reactions, and so predicting their outcome.
Electrometallurgy
Electrometallurgy involves metallurgical processes that take place in some form of electrolytic cell. The most common types of electrometallurgical processes are electrowinning and electro-refining. Electrowinning is an electrolysis process used to recover metals in aqueous solution, usually as the result of an ore having undergone one or more hydrometallurgical processes. The metal of interest is plated onto the cathode, while the anode is an inert electrical conductor. Electro-refining is used to dissolve an impure metallic anode (typically from a smelting process) and produce a high purity cathode. Fused salt electrolysis is another electrometallurgical process whereby the valuable metal has been dissolved into a molten salt which acts as the electrolyte, and the valuable metal collects on the cathode of the cell. The fused salt electrolysis process is conducted at temperatures sufficient to keep both the electrolyte and the metal being produced in the molten state. The scope of electrometallurgy has significant overlap with the areas of hydrometallurgy and (in the case of fused salt electrolysis) pyrometallurgy. Additionally, electrochemical phenomena play a considerable role in many mineral processing and hydrometallurgical processes.
Ionometallurgy
Mineral processing and extraction of metals are very energy-intensive processes, which are not exempted of producing large volumes of solid residues and wastewater, which also require energy to be further treated and disposed. Moreover, as the demand for metals increases, the metallurgical industry must rely on sources of materials with lower metal contents both from a primary (e.g., mineral ores) and/or secondary (e.g., slags, tailings, municipal waste) raw materials. Consequently, mining activities and waste recycling must evolve towards the development of more selective, efficient and environmentally friendly mineral and metal processing routes.
Mineral processing operations are needed firstly to concentrate the mineral phases of interest and reject the unwanted material physical or chemically associated to a defined raw material. The process, however, demand about 30 GJ/tonne of metal, which accounts about 29% of the total energy spent on mining in the USA. Meanwhile, pyrometallurgy is a significant producer of greenhouse gas emissions and harmful flue dust. Hydrometallurgy entails the consumption of large volumes of lixiviants such as H2SO4, HCl, KCN, NaCN which have poor selectivity. Moreover, despite the environmental concern and the use restriction imposed by some countries, cyanidation is still considered the prime process technology to recover gold from ores. Mercury is also used by artisanal miners in less economically developed countries to concentrate gold and silver from minerals, despite its obvious toxicity. Bio-hydro-metallurgy make use of living organisms, such as bacteria and fungi, and although this method demands only the input of O2 and CO2 from the atmosphere, it requires low solid-to-liquid ratios and long contact times, which significantly reduces space-time yields.
Ionometallurgy makes use of non-aqueous ionic solvents such ionic liquids (ILs) and deep eutectic solvents (DESs), which allows the development of closed-loop flow sheet to effectively recover metals by, for instance, integrating the metallurgical unit operations of leaching and electrowinning. It allows to process metals at moderate temperatures in a non-aqueous environment which allows controlling metal speciation, tolerates impurities and at the same time exhibits suitable solubilities and current efficiencies. This simplify conventional processing routes and allows a substantial reduction in the size of a metal processing plant.
Metal extraction with ionic fluids
DESs are fluids generally composed of two or three cheap and safe components that are capable of self-association, often through hydrogen bond interactions, to form eutectic mixtures with a melting point lower than that of each individual component. DESs are generally liquid at temperatures lower than 100 °C, and they exhibit similar physico-chemical properties to traditional ILs, while being much cheaper and environmentally friendlier. Most of them are mixtures of choline chloride (ChCl) and a hydrogen-bond donor (e.g., urea, ethylene glycol, malonic acid) or mixtures of choline chloride with a hydrated metal salt. Other choline salts (e.g. acetate, citrate, nitrate) have a much higher costs or need to be synthesised, and the DES formulated from these anions are typically much more viscous and can have higher conductivities than for choline chloride. This results in lower plating rates and poorer throwing power and for this reason chloride-based DES systems are still favoured. For instance, Reline (a 1:2 mixture of choline chloride and urea) has been used to selectively recover Zn and Pb from a mixed metal oxide matrix. Similarly, Ethaline (a 1: 2 mixture of choline chloride and ethylene glycol) facilitates metal dissolution in electropolishing of steels. DESs have also demonstrated promising results to recover metals from complex mixtures such Cu/Zn and Ga/As, and precious metals from minerals. It has also been demonstrated that metals can be recovered from complex mixtures by electrocatalysis using a combination of DESs as lixiviants and an oxidising agent, while metal ions can be simultaneously separated from the solution by electrowinning.
Recovery of precious metals by ionometallurgy
Precious metals are rare, naturally occurring metallic chemical elements of high economic value. Chemically, the precious metals tend to be less reactive than most elements. They include gold and silver, but also the so-called platinum group metals: ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum (see precious metals). Extraction of these metals from their corresponding hosting minerals would typically require pyrometallurgy (e.g., roasting), hydrometallurgy (cyanidation), or both as processing routes.
Early studies have demonstrated that gold dissolution rate in Ethaline compares very favourably to the cyanidation method, which is further enhanced by the addition of iodine as an oxidising agent. In an industrial process the iodine has the potential to be employed as an electrocatalyst, whereby it is continuously recovered in situ from the reduced iodide by electrochemical oxidation at the anode of an electrochemical cell. Dissolved metals can be selectively deposited at the cathode by adjusting the electrode potential. The method also allows better selectivity as part of the gangue (e.g., pyrite) tend to be dissolved more slowly.
Sperrylite (PtAs2) and moncheite (PtTe2), which are typically the more abundant platinum minerals in many orthomagmatic deposits, do not react under the same conditions in Ethaline because they are disulphide (pyrite), diarsenide (sperrylite) or ditellurides (calaverite and moncheite) minerals, which are particularly resistant to iodine oxidation. The reaction mechanism by which dissolution of platinum minerals is taking place is still under investigation.
Metal recovery from sulfide minerals with ionometallurgy
Metal sulfides (e.g., pyrite FeS2, arsenopyrite FeAsS, chalcopyrite CuFeS2) are normally processed by chemical oxidation either in aqueous media or at high temperatures. In fact, most base metals, e.g., aluminium, chromium, must be (electro)chemically reduced at high temperatures by which the process entails a high energy demand, and sometimes large volumes of aqueous waste is generated. In aqueous media chalcopyrite, for instance, is more difficult to dissolve chemically than covellite and chalcocite due to surface effects (formation of polysulfide species,). The presence of Cl− ions has been suggested to alter the morphology of any sulfide surface formed, allowing the sulfide mineral to leach more easily by preventing passivation. DESs provide a high Cl− ion concentration and low water content, whilst reducing the need for either high additional salt or acid concentrations, circumventing most oxide chemistry. Thus, the electrodissolution of sulfide minerals has demonstrated promising results in DES media in absence of passivation layers, with the release into the solution of metal ions which could be recovered from solution.
During extraction of copper from copper sulfide minerals with Ethaline, chalcocite (Cu2S) and covellite (CuS) produce a yellow solution, indicating that [CuCl4]2− complex are formed. Meanwhile, in the solution formed from chalcopyrite, Cu2+ and Cu+ species co-exist in solution due to the generation of reducing Fe2+ species at the cathode. The best selective recovery of copper (>97%) from chalcopyrite can be obtained with a mixed DES of 20 wt.% ChCl-oxalic acid and 80 wt.% Ethaline.
Metal recovery from oxide compounds with Ionometallurgy
Recovery of metals from oxide matrixes is generally carried out using mineral acids. However, electrochemical dissolution of metal oxides in DES can allow to enhance the dissolution up to more than 10 000 times in pH neutral solutions.
Studies have shown that ionic oxides such as ZnO tend to have high solubility in ChCl:malonic acid, ChCl:urea and Ethaline, which can resemble the solubilities in aqueous acidic solutions, e.g., HCl. Covalent oxides such as TiO2, however, exhibits almost no solubility. The electrochemical dissolution of metal oxides is strongly dependent on the proton activity from the HBD, i.e. capability of the protons to act as oxygen acceptors, and on the temperature. It has been reported that eutectic ionic fluids of lower pH-values, such as ChCl:oxalic acid and ChCl:lactic acid, allow a better solubility than that of higher pH (e.g., ChCl:acetic acid). Hence, different solubilities can be obtained by using, for instance, different carboxylic acids as HBD.
Outlook
Currently, the stability of most ionic liquids under practical electrochemical conditions is unknown, and the fundamental choice of ionic fluid is still empirical as there is almost no data on metal ion thermodynamics to feed into solubility and speciation models. Also, there are no Pourbaix diagrams available, no standard redox potentials, and bare knowledge of speciation or pH-values. It must be noticed that most processes reported in the literature involving ionic fluids have a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) 3 (experimental proof-of-concept) or 4 (technology validated in the lab), which is a disadvantage for short-term implementation. However, ionometallurgy has the potential to effectively recover metals in a more selective and sustainable way, as it considers environmentally benign solvents, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and avoidance of corrosive and harmful reagents.

False brinelling is a type of bearing damage caused by fretting, with or without corrosion, that causes imprints that look similar to brinelling, but are caused by a different mechanism. False brinelling may occur in bearings which act under small oscillations or vibrations.
The basic cause of false brinelling is that the design of the bearing does not have a method for redistribution of lubricant without large rotational movement of all bearing surfaces in the raceway. Lubricant is pushed out of a loaded region during small oscillatory movements and vibration where the bearings surfaces repeatedly do not move very far. Without lubricant, wear is increased when the small oscillatory movements occur again. It is possible for the resulting wear debris to oxidize and form an abrasive compound which further accelerates wear.
Mechanism of action
In normal operation, a rolling-element bearing has the rollers and races separated by a thin layer of lubricant such as grease or oil. Although these lubricants normally appear liquid (not solid), under high pressure they act as solids and keep the bearing and race from touching.
If the lubricant is removed, the bearings and races can touch directly. While bearings and races appear smooth to the eye, they are microscopically rough. Thus, high points of each surface can touch, but "valleys" do not. The bearing load is thus spread over much less area, increasing the contact stress and causing pieces of each surface to break off or to become pressure-welded and then break off when the bearing rolls on.
The broken-off pieces are also called wear debris. Wear debris is bad because it is relatively large compared to the surrounding surface finish and thus creates more regions of high contact stress. Worse, the steel in ordinary bearings can oxidize (rust), producing a more abrasive compound which accelerates wear.
Simulation of false brinelling
The simulation of false brinelling is possible with the help of the finite element method. For the simulation, the relative displacements (slip) between rolling element and raceway as well as the pressure in the rolling contact are determined. For comparison between simulation and experiments, the friction work density is used, which is the product of friction coefficient, slip, and local pressure. The simulation results can be used to determine critical application parameters or to explain the damage mechanisms.
Physical simulation of the false brinelling mechanism has been standardized since the 1980s in the Fafnir bearing test instrument, where two sets of thrust ball bearings are compressed with a fixed load, and the bearings are oscillated by an eccentric arm under standardized conditions. This culminated in the ASTM D4170 standard. Although an old method, this is still the leading quality control method for greases that need to avoid the false brinelling damage.
Examples
False brinelling was first mentioned by Almen in 1937. Almen found that wheel bearings were damaged before they were used by customers. Furthermore, he found that the bearings were more damaged for long-distance shipping of the cars and that the season of shipping also had an influence. The reason for the damaged bearings were micro-oscillations which occurred due to the shipping. The small oscillations result in fatigue cracking, followed by release of particles that subsequently started to abrasively damage the contact area between a ball and the bearing race, resulting in wear damage. Because the damage has a similar look to brinelling, it was called false brinelling.
Although the car-delivery problem has been solved, there are many modern examples. A major maintenance problem is posed by pitch bearings in wind turbines, for which specialty greases had to be developed that result in almost no false brinelling damage. Similar damage may also occur in electric and electronic contacts that are subjected to vibrations during use, such as aerospace and automotive connectors and even remote-control battery compartments. Although the damage in these areas may not be as severe as the false brinelling in bearings, the damage mechanisms are similar and result in the creation of particles in the contact that can severely influence the electrical connection.
Also, generators or pumps may fail or need service because of this damage, so it is common to have a nearby spare unit which is left off most of the time but brought into service when needed. However, vibration from the operating unit can cause bearing failure in the unit which is switched off. When that unit is turned on, the bearings may be noisy due to damage, and may fail completely within a few days or weeks even though the unit and its bearings are otherwise new. Common solutions include keeping the spare unit at a distance from the one which is on and vibrating, manually rotating shafts of the spare units on a regular (for example, weekly) basis, or regularly switching between the units so that both are in regular (for example, weekly) operation.
Until recently, bicycle headsets tended to suffer from false brinelling in the "straight ahead" steering position, due to small movements caused by flexing of the fork. Good modern headsets incorporate a plain bearing to accommodate this flexing, leaving the ball race to provide pure rotational movement.

Feet of clay is an idiom that refers to a weakness or character flaw, especially in people of prominence and power. It can also be used to refer to larger groups, such as societies, businesses, and empires. An entity with feet of clay may appear powerful and unstoppable, but they cannot support their splendor, and will easily be knocked over.
The phrase originates from the Book of Daniel in the Bible. In it, Daniel interprets a dream of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. In that dream, a magnificent statue is seen with a head of gold, but weaker and less valuable metals beneath, until finally having feet of clay mixed with iron. Daniel predicts that the glorious statue shall be smashed by a stone into pieces, like chaff on the threshing floor, and blown to the winds. The image of the expensive statue laid low has resonated as an analogy for seemingly powerful figures with substantial weaknesses.
Origin
The origin of the analogy is in Daniel 2, verses 31–45, where the prophet Daniel interprets the king's dream:
You were looking, O king, and lo! there was a great statue. This statue was huge, its brilliance extraordinary; it was standing before you, and its appearance was frightening. The head of that statue was of fine gold, its chest and arms of silver, its middle and thighs of bronze, its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and partly of clay. As you looked on, a stone was cut out, not by human hands, and it struck the statue on its feet of iron and clay and broke them in pieces. Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold, were all broken in pieces and became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors; and the wind carried them away, so that not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the statue became a great mountain and filled the whole earth.
This was the dream; now we will tell the king its interpretation. You, O king, the king of kings—to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, the might, and the glory, into whose hand he has given human beings, wherever they live, the wild animals of the field, and the birds of the air, and whom he has established as ruler over them all—you are the head of gold. After you shall arise another kingdom inferior to yours, and yet a third kingdom of bronze, which shall rule over the whole earth. And there shall be a fourth kingdom, strong as iron; just as iron crushes and smashes everything, it shall crush and shatter all these. As you saw the feet and toes partly of potter's clay and partly of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom; but some of the strength of iron shall be in it, as you saw the iron mixed with the clay. As the toes of the feet were part iron and part clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly brittle. As you saw the iron mixed with clay, so will they mix with one another in marriage, but they will not hold together, just as iron does not mix with clay. And in the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed, nor shall this kingdom be left to another people. It shall crush all these kingdoms and bring them to an end, and it shall stand forever; just as you saw that a stone was cut from the mountain not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the bronze, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The great God has informed the king what shall be hereafter. The dream is certain, and its interpretation trustworthy.
Historical context
The Book of Daniel is generally agreed to be written around 165 BC during the reign of Antiochus IV Epiphanes, who reigned as King of the Seleucid Empire from 175–164 BC. Under Antiochus IV, fierce persecution of Judaism began in Judea around 168 BCE. This persecution led both to passive resistance as well as eventually an armed military resistance movement, the Maccabean Revolt. The author of the Book of Daniel wanted to reassure readers that the end of Antiochus IV's tyranny had been foreseen by the prophet Daniel 400 years ago. To that end, the book includes vaticinia ex eventu, that is, "prophecies" of events that had already happened in the past for the author. The generally accepted interpretation of the statue dream is that it predicts the history of the Middle East up until the time of writing. The golden empire is the Babylonians (as is clear from the setting of Daniel); the second empire of silver is the Medes; the bronze empire is the Persian Empire; and the fourth iron empire is the Macedonian empire of Alexander the Great. The final empire of clay mixed with iron are the diadochi successor states, such as the Seleucid Empire that then ruled Judea. These successor states had Greek military settlements with an imported Greek elite, but generally did not over mix with the locals, and were clearly not believed to be as strong as the Greek empire of Alexander's day, which was pure iron. The actual prediction being made, then, is the fate of the fifth empire of the Seleucids: that it will be smashed by a stone "not cut from human hands", that is, by the work of God.
Notable uses
A well known instance of this phrase is in Byron's poem, "Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte":
In the ABBA song "Happy New Year", written by Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson, man is said to have feet of clay:
In the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche's posthumously published autobiography Ecce Homo:
The last thing I should promise would be to "improve" mankind. No new idols are erected by me; let the old ones learn what feet of clay mean.
In the French philosopher Albert Camus' 1938 lyrical essay The Desert in the collection Nuptials:
In this great temple deserted by the gods, all my idols have feet of clay.
The phrase is referenced in the title of Earl Sweatshirt's 2019 EP Feet of Clay.
Terry Pratchett’s 1996 novel Feet of Clay is both a reference to this, and its subject matter, golems made of clay.

Ferrous metallurgy is the metallurgy of iron and its alloys. The earliest surviving prehistoric iron artifacts, from the 4th millennium BC in Egypt, were made from meteoritic iron-nickel. It is not known when or where the smelting of iron from ores began, but by the end of the 2nd millennium BC, iron was being produced from iron ores in the region from Greece to India, The use of wrought iron (worked iron) was known by the 1st millennium BC, and its spread defined the Iron Age. During the medieval period, smiths in Europe found a way of producing wrought iron from cast iron, in this context known as pig iron, using finery forges. All these processes required charcoal as fuel.
By the 4th century BC southern India had started exporting wootz steel, with a carbon content between pig iron and wrought iron, to ancient China, Africa, the Middle East, and Europe. Archaeological evidence of cast iron appears in 5th-century BC China. New methods of producing it by carburizing bars of iron in the cementation process were devised in the 17th century. During the Industrial Revolution, new methods of producing bar iron emerged, by substituting charcoal in favor of coke, and these were later applied to produce steel, ushering in a new era of greatly increased use of iron and steel that some contemporaries described as a new "Iron Age".
In the late 1850s Henry Bessemer invented a new steelmaking process which involved blowing air through molten pig-iron to burn off carbon, and so producing mild steel. This and other 19th-century and later steel-making processes have displaced wrought iron. Today, wrought iron is no longer produced on a commercial scale, having been displaced by the functionally equivalent mild or low-carbon steel.
Meteoric iron
Iron was extracted from iron–nickel alloys, which comprise about 6% of all meteorites that fall on the Earth. That source can often be identified with certainty because of the unique crystalline features (Widmanstätten patterns) of that material, which are preserved when the metal is worked cold or at low temperature. Those artifacts include, for example, spear tips and ornaments from ancient Egypt and Sumer around 4000 BC.
These early uses appear to have been largely ceremonial or decorative. Meteoric iron is very rare, and the metal was probably very expensive, perhaps more expensive than gold. The early Hittites are known to have bartered iron (meteoric or smelted) for silver, at a rate of 40 times the iron's weight, with Assyria in the first centuries of the second millennium BC.
Meteoric iron was also fashioned into tools in the Arctic when the Thule people of Greenland began making harpoons, knives, ulus and other edged tools from pieces of the Cape York meteorite. Typically pea-size bits of metal were cold-hammered into disks and fitted to a bone handle. These artifacts were also used as trade goods with other Arctic peoples: tools made from the Cape York meteorite have been found in archaeological sites more than 1,000 miles (1,600 km) distant. When the American polar explorer Robert Peary shipped the largest piece of the meteorite to the American Museum of Natural History in New York City in 1897, it still weighed over 33 tons. Another example of a late use of meteoric iron is an adze from around 1000 AD found in Sweden.
Native iron
Native iron in the metallic state occurs rarely as small inclusions in certain basalt rocks. Besides meteoritic iron, Thule people of Greenland have used native iron from the Disko region.
Iron smelting and the Iron Age
Iron smelting—the extraction of usable metal from oxidized iron ores—is more difficult than tin and copper smelting. While these metals and their alloys can be cold-worked or melted in relatively simple furnaces (such as the kilns used for pottery) and cast into molds, smelted iron requires hot-working and can be melted only in specially designed furnaces. Iron is a common impurity in copper ores and iron ore was sometimes used as a flux, thus it is not surprising that humans mastered the technology of smelted iron only after several millennia of bronze metallurgy.
The place and time for the discovery of iron smelting is not known, partly because of the difficulty of distinguishing metal extracted from nickel-containing ores from hot-worked meteoritic iron. The archaeological evidence seems to point to the Middle East area, during the Bronze Age in the 3rd millennium BC. However, wrought iron artifacts remained a rarity until the 12th century BC.
The Iron Age is conventionally defined by the widespread replacement of bronze weapons and tools with those of iron and steel. This transition happened at different times in different places, as the technology spread. Mesopotamia was fully into the Iron Age by 900 BC. Although Egypt produced iron artifacts, bronze remained dominant until its conquest by Assyria in 663 BC. The Iron Age began in India about 1200 BC, in Central Europe about 800 BC, and in China about 300 BC. Around 500 BC, the Nubians, who had learned from the Assyrians the use of iron and were expelled from Egypt, became major manufacturers and exporters of iron. The development of bloomery versus cast iron across regions may be due to influence by the applications demanded of iron within the respective socio-political environments
In pre-Roman Britain, iron smelting was certainly firmly established during the Middle Iron Age in Yorkshire and may be linked to the Arras culture. The large-scale, communal nature of the smelting at Thornton suggests it supported the significant demand for iron tools and funerary goods required by these communities.
Ancient Near East
About 1500 BC, increasing numbers of non-meteoritic, smelted iron objects appeared in Mesopotamia, Anatolia and Egypt. Nineteen meteoric iron objects were found in the tomb of Egyptian ruler Tutankhamun, who died in 1323 BC, including an iron dagger with a golden hilt, an Eye of Horus, the mummy's head-stand and sixteen models of an artisan's tools. An Ancient Egyptian sword bearing the name of pharaoh Merneptah as well as a battle axe with an iron blade and gold-decorated bronze shaft were both found in the excavation of Ugarit.
Although iron objects dating from the Bronze Age have been found across the Eastern Mediterranean, bronzework appears to have greatly predominated during this period. As the technology spread, iron came to replace bronze as the dominant metal used for tools and weapons across the Eastern Mediterranean (the Levant, Cyprus, Greece, Crete, Anatolia and Egypt).
Iron was originally smelted in bloomeries, furnaces where bellows were used to force air through a pile of iron ore and burning charcoal. The carbon monoxide produced by the charcoal reduced the iron oxide from the ore to metallic iron. The bloomery, however, was not hot enough to melt the iron, so the metal collected in the bottom of the furnace as a spongy mass, or bloom. Workers then repeatedly beat and folded it to force out the molten slag. This laborious, time-consuming process produced wrought iron, a malleable but fairly soft alloy.
Concurrent with the transition from bronze to iron was the discovery of carburization, the process of adding carbon to wrought iron. While the iron bloom contained some carbon, the subsequent hot-working oxidized most of it. Smiths in the Middle East discovered that wrought iron could be turned into a much harder product by heating the finished piece in a bed of charcoal, and then quenching it in water or oil. This procedure turned the outer layers of the piece into steel, an alloy of iron and iron carbides, with an inner core of less brittle iron.
Theories on the origin of iron smelting
The development of iron smelting was traditionally attributed to the Hittites of Anatolia of the Late Bronze Age. It was believed that they maintained a monopoly on iron working, and that their empire had been based on that advantage. According to that theory, the ancient Sea Peoples, who invaded the Eastern Mediterranean and destroyed the Hittite empire at the end of the Late Bronze Age, were responsible for spreading the knowledge through that region. This theory is no longer held in the mainstream of scholarship, since there is no archaeological evidence of the alleged Hittite monopoly. While there are some iron objects from Bronze Age Anatolia, the number is comparable to iron objects found in Egypt and other places of the same time period, and only a small number of those objects were weapons.
A more recent theory claims that the development of iron technology was driven by the disruption of the copper and tin trade routes, due to the collapse of the empires at the end of the Late Bronze Age. These metals, especially tin, were not widely available and metal workers had to transport them over long distances, whereas iron ores were widely available. However, no known archaeological evidence suggests a shortage of bronze or tin in the Early Iron Age. Bronze objects remained abundant, and these objects have the same percentage of tin as those from the Late Bronze Age.
Indian subcontinent
The history of ferrous metallurgy in the Indian subcontinent began in the 2nd millennium BC. Archaeological sites in the Gangetic plains have yielded iron implements dated between 1800 and 1200 BC. By the early 13th century BC, iron smelting was practiced on a large scale in India. In Southern India (present day Mysore) iron was in use 12th to 11th centuries BC. The technology of iron metallurgy advanced in the politically stable Maurya period and during a period of peaceful settlements in the 1st millennium BC.
Iron artifacts such as spikes, knives, daggers, arrow-heads, bowls, spoons, saucepans, axes, chisels, tongs, door fittings, etc., dated from 600 to 200 BC, have been discovered at several archaeological sites of India. The Greek historian Herodotus wrote the first western account of the use of iron in India. The Indian mythological texts, the Upanishads, have mentions of weaving, pottery and metallurgy, as well. The Romans had high regard for the excellence of steel from India in the time of the Gupta Empire.
Perhaps as early as 500 BC, although certainly by 200 AD, high-quality steel was produced in southern India by the crucible technique. In this system, high-purity wrought iron, charcoal, and glass were mixed in a crucible and heated until the iron melted and absorbed the carbon. Iron chain was used in Indian suspension bridges as early as the 4th century.
Wootz steel was produced in India and Sri Lanka from around 300 BC. Wootz steel is famous from Classical Antiquity for its durability and ability to hold an edge. When asked by King Porus to select a gift, Alexander is said to have chosen, over gold or silver, thirty pounds of steel. Wootz steel was originally a complex alloy with iron as its main component together with various trace elements. Recent studies have suggested that its qualities may have been due to the formation of carbon nanotubes in the metal. According to Will Durant, the technology passed to the Persians and from them to Arabs who spread it through the Middle East. In the 16th century, the Dutch carried the technology from South India to Europe, where it was mass-produced.
Steel was produced in Sri Lanka from 300 BC by furnaces blown by the monsoon winds. The furnaces were dug into the crests of hills, and the wind was diverted into the air vents by long trenches. This arrangement created a zone of high pressure at the entrance, and a zone of low pressure at the top of the furnace. The flow is believed to have allowed higher temperatures than bellows-driven furnaces could produce, resulting in better-quality iron. Steel made in Sri Lanka was traded extensively within the region and in the Islamic world.
One of the world's foremost metallurgical curiosities is an iron pillar located in the Qutb complex in Delhi. The pillar is made of wrought iron (98% Fe), is almost seven meters high and weighs more than six tonnes. The pillar was erected by Chandragupta II Vikramaditya and has withstood 1,600 years of exposure to heavy rains with relatively little corrosion.
China
Numerous scholars have suggested that the Afanasievo culture may be responsible for the introduction of metallurgy to China. In particular, contact between the Afanasievo culture and the Majiayao culture and the Qijia culture are considered for the transmission of bronze technology.
In 2008, two iron fragments were excavated at the Mogou site, in Gansu. They have been dated to the 14th century BC, belonging to the period of Siwa culture. One of the fragments was made of bloomery iron rather than meteoritic iron.
Other than this one exception, the earliest known iron artifacts made from bloomeries in China date to end of the 9th century BC. Cast iron was used in ancient China for warfare, agriculture and architecture. Around 500 BC, metalworkers in the southern state of Wu achieved a temperature of 1130 °C. At this temperature, iron combines with 4.3% carbon and melts. The liquid iron can be cast into molds, a method far less laborious than individually forging each piece of iron from a bloom.
Cast iron is rather brittle and unsuitable for striking implements. It can be decarburized to steel or wrought iron by heating it in air for several days. In China, these iron working methods spread northward, and by 300 BC, iron was the material of choice throughout China for most tools and weapons. A mass grave in Hebei province, dated to the early 3rd century BC, contains several soldiers buried with their weapons and other equipment. The artifacts recovered from this grave are variously made of wrought iron, cast iron, malleabilized cast iron, and quench-hardened steel, with only a few, probably ornamental, bronze weapons.
During the Han dynasty (202 BC–220 AD), the government established ironworking as a state monopoly, repealed during the latter half of the dynasty and returned to private entrepreneurship, and built a series of large blast furnaces in Henan province, each capable of producing several tons of iron per day. By this time, Chinese metallurgists had discovered how to fine molten pig iron, stirring it in the open air until it lost its carbon and could be hammered (wrought). In modern Mandarin-Chinese, this process is now called chao, literally stir frying. Pig iron is known as 'raw iron', while wrought iron is known as 'cooked iron'. By the 1st century BC, Chinese metallurgists had found that wrought iron and cast iron could be melted together to yield an alloy of intermediate carbon content, that is, steel.
According to legend, the sword of Liu Bang, the first Han emperor, was made in this fashion. Some texts of the era mention "harmonizing the hard and the soft" in the context of ironworking; the phrase may refer to this process. The ancient city of Wan (Nanyang) from the Han period forward was a major center of the iron and steel industry. Along with their original methods of forging steel, the Chinese had also adopted the production methods of creating Wootz steel, an idea imported from India to China by the 5th century AD.
During the Han dynasty, the Chinese were also the first to apply hydraulic power (i.e. a waterwheel) in working the bellows of the blast furnace. This was recorded in the year 31 AD, as an innovation by the Chinese mechanical engineer and politician Du Shi, Prefect of Nanyang. Although Du Shi was the first to apply water power to bellows in metallurgy, the first drawn and printed illustration of its operation with water power appeared in 1313 AD, in the Yuan dynasty era text called the Nong Shu.
In the 11th century, there is evidence of the production of steel in Song China using two techniques: a "berganesque" method that produced inferior, heterogeneous steel and a precursor to the modern Bessemer process that utilized partial decarbonization via repeated forging under a cold blast. By the 11th century, there was a large amount of deforestation in China due to the iron industry's demands for charcoal. By this time however, the Chinese had learned to use bituminous coke to replace charcoal, and with this switch in resources many acres of prime timberland in China were spared.
Iron Age Europe
The earliest iron objects found in Europe date from the 3rd millennium BC, and are assigned to the Yamnaya culture and Catacomb culture. Eastern Europe, especially the Cis-Ural region, shows the highest concentration of early and middle Bronze Age iron objects in western Eurasia, though most of these are thought to consist of meteoric Iron. A knife blade from the Catacomb culture dated to c. 2300 BC is thought to have been made from smelted iron. During most of the Middle and Late Bronze Age in Central Europe, iron was present, though scarce. It was used for personal ornaments and small knives, for repairs on bronzes, and for bimetallic items. Early smelted iron finds from central Europe include an iron knife or sickle from Ganovce in Slovakia, possibly dating from the 18th-15th century BC, an iron ring from Vorwohlde in Germany dating from circa the 15th century BC, and an iron chisel from Heegermühle in Germany dating from circa 1000 BC. Smelted iron objects are known from Eastern Europe dating from after 1200 BC.
In the 11th century BC iron swords replaced bronze swords in Southern Europe, especially in Greece, and in the 10th century BC iron became the prevailing metal in use. In the Carpathian Basin there is a significant increase in iron finds dating from the 10th century BC onwards, with some finds possibly dating as early as the 12th century BC. Iron swords have been found in central Europe dating from the 10th century BC; however, the Iron Age began in earnest with the Hallstatt culture from 800 BC. Steel was produced from circa 800 BC as part of the production of swords, and swords made entirely of high-carbon steel are known from pre-Roman period. Evidence for iron metallurgy in Britain dates from the 10th century BC, with the beginning of the Iron Age dated to the 8th century BC. The production of high-carbon steel is attested in Britain from circa 490 BC. Iron metallurgy began to be practised in Scandinavia during the later Bronze Age from at least the 9th century BC, with evidence for steel production from 800–700 BC. Iron and steel artefacts, including high-carbon steel, were manufactured in northern Sweden, Finland and Norway (in the Cap of the North) from c. 200–50 BC. Evidence for iron metallurgy in Italy and Sardinia dates from the Late Bronze Age (c. 1350-950 BC). High-carbon steel tools were produced in Iberia (Portugal) from c. 900 BC.
From 500 BC the La Tène culture saw a significant increase in iron production, with iron metallurgy also becoming common in southern Scandinavia. The spread of ironworking in Central and Western Europe is associated with Celtic expansion. By the 1st century BC, Noric steel was famous for its quality and sought after by the Roman military. The annual output of iron in the Roman Empire is estimated at 84,750 tonnes.
The production of ultrahigh carbon steel is attested at the Germanic site of Heeten in the Netherlands from the 2nd to 4th/5th centuries AD, in the Late Roman Iron Age.
Sub-Saharan Africa
Archaeometallurgical scientific knowledge and technological development originated in numerous centers of Africa; the centers of origin were located in West Africa, Central Africa, and East Africa; consequently, as these origin centers are located within inner Africa, these archaeometallurgical developments are thus native African technologies. Iron metallurgical development occurred 2631 BCE – 2458 BCE at Lejja, in Nigeria, 2136 BCE – 1921 BCE at Obui, in Central Africa Republic, 1895 BCE – 1370 BCE at Tchire Ouma 147, in Niger, and 1297 BCE – 1051 BCE at Dekpassanware, in Togo.
Though there is some uncertainty, some archaeologists believe that iron metallurgy was developed independently in sub-Saharan Africa (possibly in West Africa).
Inhabitants of Termit, in eastern Niger, smelted iron around 1500 BC.
In the region of the Aïr Mountains in Niger there are also signs of independent copper smelting between 2500 and 1500 BC. The process was not in a developed state, indicating smelting was not foreign. It became mature about 1500 BC.
Archaeological sites containing iron smelting furnaces and slag have also been excavated at sites in the Nsukka region of southeast Nigeria in what is now Igboland: dating to 2000 BC at the site of Lejja (Eze-Uzomaka 2009) and to 750 BC and at the site of Opi (Holl 2009). The site of Gbabiri (in the Central African Republic) has yielded evidence of iron metallurgy, from a reduction furnace and blacksmith workshop; with earliest dates of 896–773 BC and 907–796 BC respectively. Similarly, smelting in bloomery-type furnaces appear in the Nok culture of central Nigeria by about 550 BC and possibly a few centuries earlier.
There is also evidence that carbon steel was made in Western Tanzania by the ancestors of the Haya people as early as 2,300 to 2,000 years ago (about 300 BC or soon after) by a complex process of "pre-heating" allowing temperatures inside a furnace to reach 1300 to 1400 °C.
Iron and copper working spread southward through the continent, reaching the Cape around AD 200. The widespread use of iron revolutionized the Bantu-speaking farming communities who adopted it, driving out and absorbing the rock tool using hunter-gatherer societies they encountered as they expanded to farm wider areas of savanna. The technologically superior Bantu-speakers spread across southern Africa and became wealthy and powerful, producing iron for tools and weapons in large, industrial quantities.
The earliest records of bloomery-type furnaces in East Africa are discoveries of smelted iron and carbon in Nubia that date back between the 7th and 6th centuries BC, particularly in Meroe where there are known to have been ancient bloomeries that produced metal tools for the Nubians and Kushites and produced surplus for their economy.
Medieval Islamic world
Iron technology was further advanced by several inventions in medieval Islam, during the Islamic Golden Age. By the 11th century, every province throughout the Muslim world had industrial mills in operation, from Islamic Spain and North Africa in the west to the Middle East and Central Asia in the east. There are also 10th-century references to cast iron, as well as archeological evidence of blast furnaces being used in the Ayyubid and Mamluk empires from the 11th century, thus suggesting a diffusion of Chinese metal technology to the Islamic world.
One of the most famous steels produced in the medieval Near East was Damascus steel used for swordmaking, and mostly produced in Damascus, Syria, in the period from 900 to 1750. This was produced using the crucible steel method, based on the earlier Indian wootz steel. This process was adopted in the Middle East using locally produced steels. The exact process remains unknown, but it allowed carbides to precipitate out as micro particles arranged in sheets or bands within the body of a blade. Carbides are far harder than the surrounding low carbon steel, so swordsmiths could produce an edge that cut hard materials with the precipitated carbides, while the bands of softer steel let the sword as a whole remain tough and flexible. A team of researchers based at the Technical University of Dresden that uses X-rays and electron microscopy to examine Damascus steel discovered the presence of cementite nanowires and carbon nanotubes. Peter Paufler, a member of the Dresden team, says that these nanostructures give Damascus steel its distinctive properties and are a result of the forging process.
Medieval and early modern Europe
There was no fundamental change in the technology of iron production in Europe for many centuries. European metal workers continued to produce iron in bloomeries. However, the Medieval period brought two developments—the use of water power in the bloomery process in various places (outlined above), and the first European production in cast iron.
Powered bloomeries
Sometime in the medieval period, water power was applied to the bloomery process. It is possible that this was at the Cistercian Abbey of Clairvaux as early as 1135, but it was certainly in use in early 13th century France and Sweden. In England, the first clear documentary evidence for this is the accounts of a forge of the Bishop of Durham, near Bedburn in 1408, but that was certainly not the first such ironworks. In the Furness district of England, powered bloomeries were in use into the beginning of the 18th century, and near Garstang until about 1770.
The Catalan Forge was a variety of powered bloomery. Bloomeries with hot blast were used in upstate New York in the mid-19th century.
Blast furnace
The preferred method of iron production in Europe until the development of the puddling process in 1783–84. Cast iron development lagged in Europe because wrought iron was the desired product and the intermediate step of producing cast iron involved an expensive blast furnace and further refining of pig iron to cast iron, which then required a labor and capital intensive conversion to wrought iron.
Through a good portion of the Middle Ages, in Western Europe, iron was still being made by the working of iron blooms into wrought iron. Some of the earliest casting of iron in Europe occurred in Sweden, in two sites, Lapphyttan and Vinarhyttan, between 1150 and 1350. Some scholars have speculated the practice followed the Mongols across Russia to these sites, but there is no clear proof of this hypothesis, and it would certainly not explain the pre-Mongol datings of many of these iron-production centres. In any event, by the late 14th century, a market for cast iron goods began to form, as a demand developed for cast iron cannonballs.
Finery forge
An alternative method of decarburising pig iron was the finery forge, which seems to have been devised in the region around Namur in the 15th century. By the end of that century, this Walloon process spread to the Pay de Bray on the eastern boundary of Normandy, and then to England, where it became the main method of making wrought iron by 1600. It was introduced to Sweden by Louis de Geer in the early 17th century and was used to make the oregrounds iron favoured by English steelmakers.
A variation on this was the German forge. This became the main method of producing bar iron in Sweden.
Cementation process
In the early 17th century, ironworkers in Western Europe had developed the cementation process for carburizing wrought iron. Wrought iron bars and charcoal were packed into stone boxes, then sealed with clay to be held at a red heat continually tended in an oxygen-free state immersed in nearly pure carbon (charcoal) for up to a week. During this time, carbon diffused into the surface layers of the iron, producing cement steel or blister steel—also known as case hardened, where the portions wrapped in iron (the pick or axe blade) became harder, than say an axe hammer-head or shaft socket which might be insulated by clay to keep them from the carbon source. The earliest place where this process was used in England was at Coalbrookdale from 1619, where Sir Basil Brooke had two cementation furnaces (recently excavated in 2001–2005). For a time in the 1610s, he owned a patent on the process, but had to surrender this in 1619. He probably used Forest of Dean iron as his raw material, but it was soon found that oregrounds iron was more suitable. The quality of the steel could be improved by faggoting, producing the so-called shear steel.
Crucible steel
In the 1740s, Benjamin Huntsman found a means of melting blister steel, made by the cementation process, in crucibles. The resulting crucible steel, usually cast in ingots, was more homogeneous than blister steel.
Transition to coke in England
Beginnings
Early iron smelting used charcoal as both the heat source and the reducing agent. By the 18th century, the availability of wood for making charcoal was limiting the expansion of iron production, so that England became increasingly dependent for a considerable part of the iron required by its industry, on Sweden (from the mid-17th century) and then from about 1725 also on Russia.
Smelting with coal (or its derivative coke) was a long sought objective. The production of pig iron with coke was probably achieved by Dud Dudley around 1619, and with a mixed fuel made from coal and wood again in the 1670s. However this was probably only a technological rather than a commercial success. Shadrach Fox may have smelted iron with coke at Coalbrookdale in Shropshire in the 1690s, but only to make cannonballs and other cast iron products such as shells. However, in the peace after the Nine Years War, there was no demand for these.
Abraham Darby and his successors
In 1707, Abraham Darby I patented a method of making cast iron pots. His pots were thinner and hence cheaper than those of his rivals. Needing a larger supply of pig iron he leased the blast furnace at Coalbrookdale in 1709. There, he made iron using coke, thus establishing the first successful business in Europe to do so. His products were all of cast iron, though his immediate successors attempted (with little commercial success) to fine this to bar iron.
Bar iron thus continued normally to be made with charcoal pig iron until the mid-1750s. In 1755 Abraham Darby II (with partners) opened a new coke-using furnace at Horsehay in Shropshire, and this was followed by others. These supplied coke pig iron to finery forges of the traditional kind for the production of bar iron. The reason for the delay remains controversial.
New forge processes
It was only after this that economically viable means of converting pig iron to bar iron began to be devised. A process known as potting and stamping was devised in the 1760s and improved in the 1770s, and seems to have been widely adopted in the West Midlands from about 1785. However, this was largely replaced by Henry Cort's puddling process, patented in 1784, but probably only made to work with grey pig iron in about 1790. These processes permitted the great expansion in the production of iron that constitutes the Industrial Revolution for the iron industry.
In the early 19th century, Hall discovered that the addition of iron oxide to the charge of the puddling furnace caused a violent reaction, in which the pig iron was decarburised, this became known as 'wet puddling'. It was also found possible to produce steel by stopping the puddling process before decarburisation was complete.
Hot blast
The efficiency of the blast furnace was improved by the change to hot blast, patented by James Beaumont Neilson in Scotland in 1828. This further reduced production costs. Within a few decades, the practice was to have a 'stove' as large as the furnace next to it into which the waste gas (containing CO) from the furnace was directed and burnt. The resultant heat was used to preheat the air blown into the furnace.
Industrial steelmaking
Apart from some production of puddled steel, English steel continued to be made by the cementation process, sometimes followed by remelting to produce crucible steel. These were batch-based processes whose raw material was bar iron, particularly Swedish oregrounds iron.
The problem of mass-producing cheap steel was solved in 1855 by Henry Bessemer, with the introduction of the Bessemer converter at his steelworks in Sheffield, England. (An early converter can still be seen at the city's Kelham Island Museum). In the Bessemer process, molten pig iron from the blast furnace was charged into a large crucible, and then air was blown through the molten iron from below, igniting the dissolved carbon from the coke. As the carbon burned off, the melting point of the mixture increased, but the heat from the burning carbon provided the extra energy needed to keep the mixture molten. After the carbon content in the melt had dropped to the desired level, the air draft was cut off: a typical Bessemer converter could convert a 25-ton batch of pig iron to steel in half an hour.
In the 1860s development of regenerative furnaces and higher temperature refractory lining allowed to melt steel in an open hearth. That was slow and energy intensive, but allowed to better control the chemical makeup of the product and recycle iron scrap.
The acidic refractory lining of Bessemer converters and early open hearths didn't allow to remove phosphorus from steel with lime, which prolonged the life of puddling furnaces in order to utilize phosphorous iron ores abundant in Continental Europe. However, in the 1870s Gilchrist–Thomas process was developed, and later basic lining was adopted for the open hearths as well.
Finally, the basic oxygen process was introduced at the Voest-Alpine works in 1952; a modification of the basic Bessemer process, it lances oxygen from above the steel (instead of bubbling air from below), reducing the amount of nitrogen uptake into the steel. The basic oxygen process is used in all modern steelworks; the last Bessemer converter in the U.S. was retired in 1968. Furthermore, the last three decades have seen a massive increase in the mini-mill business, where scrap steel only is melted with an electric arc furnace. These mills only produced bar products at first, but have since expanded into flat and heavy products, once the exclusive domain of the integrated steelworks.
Until these 19th-century developments, steel was an expensive commodity and only used for a limited number of purposes where a particularly hard or flexible metal was needed, as in the cutting edges of tools and springs. The widespread availability of inexpensive steel powered the Second Industrial Revolution and modern society as we know it. Mild steel ultimately replaced wrought iron for almost all purposes, and wrought iron is no longer commercially produced. With minor exceptions, alloy steels only began to be made in the late 19th century. Stainless steel was developed on the eve of World War I and was not widely used until the 1920s.
Modern steel industry
The steel industry is often considered an indicator of economic progress, because of the critical role played by steel in infrastructural and overall economic development. In 1980, there were more than 500,000 U.S. steelworkers. By 2000, the number of steelworkers had fallen to 224,000.
The economic boom in China and India caused a massive increase in the demand for steel. Between 2000 and 2005, world steel demand increased by 6%. Since 2000, several Indian and Chinese steel firms have risen to prominence, such as Tata Steel (which bought Corus Group in 2007), Baosteel Group and Shagang Group. As of 2017, though, ArcelorMittal is the world's largest steel producer. In 2005, the British Geological Survey stated China was the top steel producer with about one-third of the world share; Japan, Russia, and the US followed respectively.
The large production capacity of steel results in a significant amount of carbon dioxide emissions inherent related to the main production route. In 2019, it was estimated that 7 to 9% of the global carbon dioxide emissions resulted from the steel industry. Reduction of these emissions are expected to come from a shift in the main production route using cokes, more recycling of steel and the application of carbon capture and storage or carbon capture and utilization technology.
In 2008, steel began trading as a commodity on the London Metal Exchange. At the end of 2008, the steel industry faced a sharp downturn that led to many cut-backs.

Field-Map is a proprietary integrated tool designed for programmatic field data collection from IFER – Monitoring and Mapping Solutions, Ltd.
It is mainly used for the allocation of forest ecosystems and data collection during field analysis. This application is able to work with relational databases, and provides seamless communication with external devices such as GPS, laser rangefinders and for national forest inventories in Ireland, Cape Verde, Czech Republic, Belgium, Slovakia, Hungary and Russia

Fieldcraft comprises the techniques and methods involved in living, traveling, or making military or scientific observations in the field. The term "fieldcraft" is used in a broad range of industries including military, oil and gas, wildlife and food and agriculture.
In the anti-terrorism field, field craft is "the art of evading monitoring by police and the security services." Terror groups such as the one tracked by Operation Guava were caught "despite their own well developed field craft."
The term has been used since at least World War II. For example, Diana Rowden, a war hero, was described at the time as "very good in field craft and excellent with guns”.
Field skills include camouflage, land and water navigation, understanding the difference between concealment from view and cover from small arms fire, using the terrain and its features to mask ground movement, obstacle crossing, selecting good firing positions, lying-up positions, camping positions, effective observation, camouflage penetration, countersurveillance, detecting enemy-fire directionality and range, survival, evasion, and escape techniques.
Good fieldcraft is especially important for the effectiveness and survival of infantry soldiers, snipers, special forces, reconnaissance and sabotage teams. Efficient fieldcraft is only possible by spending time, effort, and attention to memorizing battlefield details, infiltration and escape routes, construction and employment of hiding positions, enemy force doctrines and equipment.

In the picture framing industry, a fillet (also referred to as a slip) is a small piece of moulding which fits inside a larger frame or, typically, underneath or in between matting, used for decorative purposes. The picture framing term is probably related to, though not necessarily derived from, the engineering term, which it is frequently pronounced similarly to; however, unlike the use of fillets in mechanical engineering, the use of "fillets" in picture frames is wholly decorative.
Pronunciation
Fillet can be pronounced in two ways. The other is similar to the French-derived culinary term. Either is acceptable in English, though most frame shops prefer one or the other pronunciation.
Construction
Fillets are typically made of soft or hard wood, and feature a flat "lip" which can fit underneath a mat; the non-lip portion is what is displayed. Except for their shape and size (which is understandably small), fillets are constructed similarly to picture frames, usually from wood or polystyrene. One way is to pronounce it as if it were "fill-et" such as the cut of meat, as the similar term from mechanical engineering is pronounced. Metal fillets are very rare. Fillets are available in a number of styles and finishes, including gold and silver leaf finishes.
Uses
The fillet is normally used as decoration in the lining of a picture frame or underneath a mat inside one; the intent is to help draw the eye inwards to the document being framed.
However, one can also use inverted fillets as form of picture frame on small, flat objects, as seen below:
In this case, the card was glued to the lip of the inverted fillet (which is thus hidden behind the back of the card).
Objects such as this that have been framed using inverted fillets can be backed and then affixed to wire for hanging, displayed on an easel, or used inside of a larger shadowbox display. It is important to note that only very small, extremely flat objects can be framed using only an inverted fillet, as a fillet lacks the depth of a traditional picture frame, and due to its size, weight and construction, could not support a great amount of weight on its own.

The fineness of a precious metal object (coin, bar, jewelry, etc.) represents the weight of fine metal therein, in proportion to the total weight which includes alloying base metals and any impurities. Alloy metals are added to increase the hardness and durability of coins and jewelry, alter colors, decrease the cost per weight, or avoid the cost of high-purity refinement.. For example, copper is added to the precious metal silver to make a more durable alloy for use in coins, housewares and jewelry. Coin silver, which was used for making silver coins in the past, contains 90% silver and 10% copper, by mass. Sterling silver contains 92.5% silver and 7.5% of other metals, usually copper, by mass.
Various ways of expressing fineness have been used and two remain in common use: millesimal fineness expressed in units of parts per 1,000 and karats or carats used only for gold. Karats measure the parts per 24, so that 18 karat = 18⁄24 = 75% gold and 24 karat gold is considered 100% gold.
Millesimal fineness
Millesimal fineness is a system of denoting the purity of platinum, gold and silver alloys by parts per thousand of pure metal by mass in the alloy. For example, an alloy containing 75% gold is denoted as "750". Many European countries use decimal hallmark stamps (i.e., "585", "750", etc.) rather than "14 k", "18 k", etc., which is used in the United States, and the United Kingdom prior to the 1970s.
It is an extension of the older karat system of denoting the purity of gold by fractions of 24, such as "18 karat" for an alloy with 75% (18 parts per 24) pure gold by mass.
The millesimal fineness is usually rounded to a three figure number, particularly where used as a hallmark, and the fineness may vary slightly from the traditional versions of purity.
The most common millesimal finenesses used for precious metals and the most common terms for them are:
Platinum
999.95: what most dealers would buy as if 100% pure; the most common purity for platinum bullion coins and bars
999—three nines fine
950: the most common purity for platinum jewelry
900—one nine fine
850
750
Gold
999.999—six nines fine: The purest gold ever produced, refined by the Perth Mint in 1957.
999.99—five nines fine: The purest type of gold in production; the Royal Canadian Mint regularly produces commemorative coins in this fineness, including the world's largest, at 100 kg.
999.9—four nines fine: Most popular. E.g. ordinary Canadian Gold Maple Leaf and American Buffalo coins.
999—24 karat, also occasionally known as three nines fine: e.g., Chinese Gold Panda coins.
995: The minimum allowed in Good Delivery gold bars.
990—two nines fine
986—Ducat fineness: Formerly used by Venetian and Holy Roman Empire mints; still in use in Austria and Hungary.
965: Thai standard for gold purity. Often considered equivalent to 23 karat in this context.
958—23 karat
916—22 karat: Crown gold. Historically common for bullion coins, and currently used for British Sovereigns, South African Krugerrands, and the modern (since 1986) American Gold Eagles. Standard for jewelry in some countries such as India.
900—one nine fine: American Eagle denominations for 1837–1933; used in Latin Monetary Union mintage (e.g. French and Swiss "Napoleon coin" 20 francs).
899—American Eagles briefly for 1834–1836.
834—20 karat
750—18 karat: Typical fineness for modern jewelry in most of Europe. Even in regions where higher purities are common, this is the maximum fineness used for gemstone-set jewelry, as the metal must be hard enough to robustly hold the stone in place.
625—15 karat
585—14 karat: Most common fineness for jewelry in the United States. While 14 karat is more precisely 583.3 fine, this level is not generally used in decimal fineness.
500—12 karat
417—10 karat: Historically, the minimum standard for gold in the US. As of August 2018, any marked karat is permissible.
375—9 karat: Minimum standard for gold in some of the Commonwealth realms: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, UK, etc. It is also the minimum in Austria, Ireland, Portugal and France.
333—8 karat: Minimum standard for gold in Germany after 1884. It is also the minimum for Denmark, Greece and Mexico.
042–1 karat: Legal minimum for gold in the US since the revision of the FTC Guides of August 2018.
Silver
999.99—five nines fine: The purest silver ever produced. This was achieved by the Royal Silver Company of Bolivia.
999.9—four nines fine: ultra-fine silver used by the Royal Canadian Mint for their Silver Maple Leaf and other silver coins
999—fine silver or three nines fine: Used in Good Delivery bullion bars and most silver bullion coins. Used in U.S. silver commemorative coins and silver proof coins starting in 2019.
980: common standard used in Mexico ca. 1930–1945
958: (23⁄24) Britannia silver
950: French 1st Standard
947.9: 91 zolotnik Russian silver
935: Swiss standard for watchcases after 1887, to meet the British Merchandise Marks Act and to be of equal grade to 925 sterling. Sometimes claimed to have arisen as a Swiss misunderstanding of the standard required for British sterling. Usually marked with three Swiss bears. Used in the Art Deco period in Austria and Germany. Scandinavian silver jewelers used 935 silver after the 2nd World War.
933: Bolivian pesos bolivianos in 1975.
925: (37⁄40) Sterling silver. The UK has used this alloy from the early 12th century. Equivalent to plata de primera ley in Spain (first law silver). The standard used for English coinage from the time of Edward I until 1920. Widely used in the manufacture of silver items, including flatware, jewelry, musical instruments, home decor, etc.
917: a standard used for minting Indian silver (rupees), during the British raj and for some coins during the first Brazilian Republic.
916: 88 zolotnik Russian silver (actually 91.66%)
903: Mexican Reals between 1823 and 1897 and Pesos 1910 to 1940; Bolivian Soles 1827–1859.
900: one nine fine, coin silver, or 90% silver: e.g. Flowing Hair and 1837–1964 U.S. silver coins. Also used in U.S. silver commemorative coins and silver proof coins 1982–2018. Also used in coins from Spain, Russia, China, Argentina, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Japan, Egypt, Turkey, Lebanon, Israel, and Panama. Commonly used in American cutlery before about 1870
892.4: US coinage 1485⁄1664 fine "standard silver" as defined by the Coinage Act of 1792: e.g. Draped Bust and Capped Bust U.S. silver coins (1795–1836)
875: 84 zolotnik is the most common fineness for Russian silver. Swiss standard, commonly used for export watchcases (also 800 and later 935). Also used in silver from the Baltic States, Finland, Poland, Switzerland, and Romania. Commonly found in jewelry and other silver items produced in the Soviet Union.
868: 83 1⁄3 zolotnik. Imperial Russian coinage between 1797 and 1885.
835: A standard predominantly used in Germany after 1884, and for some Dutch silver; and for the minting of coins in countries of the Latin Monetary Union
833: (5⁄6) a common standard for continental silver especially among the Dutch, Swedish, and Germans. Some Bolivian centavos in 1909.
830: A common standard used in older Scandinavian silver
800: The minimum standard for silver in Germany after 1884; the French 2nd standard for silver; "plata de segunda ley" in Spain (second law silver); Egyptian silver; Swedish silver; Canadian silver circulating coinage from 1920 to 1966/7 Used for the outer cladding of US half dollars between 1965 and 1970, and commemorative issue Eisenhower dollars between 1971 and 1978 (cores are 20.9% silver).
750: An uncommon silver standard found in older German, Swiss and Austro-Hungarian silver
720: Decoplata: many Mexican and Dutch silver coins use this standard, as well as some coins from Portugal's former colonies, Japan, Uruguay, Ecuador, Egypt, Mexico, and Morocco.
700: Chile 50 Centavos 1902–1905
600: Used in some examples of postwar Japanese coins, such as the 1957-1966 100 yen coin. Also used in older Swedish coins.
500: Standard used for British coinage 1920–1946 as well as Canadian circulating coins from 1967 to 1968 and commemoratives from 1971 to 1991 and some coins from Colombia and Brazil. Also used on some Peruvian and Soviet coins of the 1920s and 30s. Large Panamanian 20 balboas coins were also minted at this fineness from 1980 to 1985
450: Chile Centavos 1915–1919
420: Used for Mexico 50 Centavos in 1935
400: Some Swedish coins; early 1900s Chile centavos
350: Standard used for US Jefferson "war nickels" minted between 1942 and 1945.
300: Used for Mexico 50 Centavos 1950–1951
100: Used for Mexican pesos 1957–1967.
Carat
The carat (UK spelling, symbol c or Ct) or karat (US spelling, symbol k or Kt) is a fractional measure of purity for gold alloys, in parts fine per 24 parts whole. The carat system is a standard adopted by US federal law.
Mass
where
C is the carat rating of the material,
Mg is the mass of pure gold in the alloy, and
Mm is the total mass of the material.
24-carat gold is pure (while 100% purity is very difficult to attain, 24-carat as a designation is permitted in commerce for a minimum of 99.95% purity), 18-carat gold is 18 parts gold, 6 parts another metal (forming an alloy with 75% gold), 12-carat gold is 12 parts gold (12 parts another metal), and so forth.
In Britain, the carat was divisible into four grains, and the grain was divisible into four quarts. For example, a gold alloy of 127⁄128 fineness (that is, 99.2% purity) could have been described as being 23-carat, 3-grain, 1-quart gold.
The carat fractional system is increasingly being complemented or superseded by the millesimal system, described above for bullion, though jewelry generally tends to still use the carat system.
Conversion between percentage of pure gold and karats:
58.33–62.50% = 14 c (nominally 58.33%)
75.00–79.16% = 18 c (nominally 75.00%)
91.66–95.83% = 22 c (nominally 91.66%)
95.83–99.95% = 23 c (nominally 95.83%)
99.95–100% = 24 c (nominally 99.95%)
Volume
However, this system of calculation gives only the mass of pure gold contained in an alloy. The term 18-carat gold means that the alloy's mass consists of 75% of gold and 25% of other metals. The quantity of gold by volume in a less-than-24-carat gold alloy differs according to the alloys used. For example, knowing that standard 18-carat yellow gold consists of 75% gold, 12.5% silver and the remaining 12.5% of copper (all by mass), the volume of pure gold in this alloy will be 60% since gold is much denser than the other metals used: 19.32 g/cm3 for gold, 10.49 g/cm3 for silver and 8.96 g/cm3 for copper.
Density
To find approximate metal purity divide the weight of your metal (dry weight) by the weight after it's been submerged completely in water (wet weight) and check the density range.
DW
WW
D
R
{\displaystyle {\frac {\text{DW}}{\text{WW}}}=DR}
It is based on Archimedes' principle and the method he used in King Hiero II's crown. The metal must be completely submerged and held in place with a string or thread without touching the container.
Etymology
Karat is a variant of carat. First attested in English in the mid-15th century, the word carat came from Middle French carat, in turn derived either from Italian carato or Medieval Latin carratus. These were borrowed into Medieval Europe from the Arabic qīrāṭ meaning "fruit of the carob tree", also "weight of 5 grains", (قيراط) and was a unit of mass though it was probably not used to measure gold in classical times. The Arabic term ultimately originates from the Greek kerátion (κεράτιον) meaning carob seed (literally "small horn") (diminutive of κέρας – kéras, "horn").
In 309 AD, Roman Emperor Constantine I began to mint a new gold coin, the solidus, that was 1⁄72 of a libra (Roman pound) of gold equal to a mass of 24 siliquae, where each siliqua (or carat) was 1⁄1728 of a libra. This is believed to be the origin of the value of the karat.
Verifying fineness
While there are many methods of detecting fake precious metals, there are realistically only two options available for verifying the marked fineness of metal as being reasonably accurate: assaying the metal (which requires destroying it), or using X-ray fluorescence (XRF). XRF will measure only the outermost portion of the piece of metal and so may get misled by thick plating.
That becomes a concern because it would be possible for an unscrupulous refiner to produce precious metals bars that are slightly less pure than marked on the bar. A refiner doing $1 billion of business each year that marked .980 pure bars as .999 fine would make about an extra $20 million in profit. In the United States, the actual purity of gold articles must be no more than .003 less than the marked purity (e.g. .996 fine for gold marked .999 fine), and the actual purity of silver articles must be no more than .004 less than the marked purity.
Fine weight
A piece of alloy metal containing a precious metal may also have the weight of its precious component referred to as its "fine weight". For example, 1 troy ounce of 18 karat gold (which is 750 ‰ gold) may be said to have a fine weight of 0.75 troy ounces.
Most modern government-issued bullion coins specify their fine weight. For example, the American Gold Eagle is embossed One Oz. Fine Gold and weighs 1.091 troy oz.
Troy mass of silver content
Fineness of silver in Britain was traditionally expressed as the mass of silver expressed in troy ounces and pennyweights (1⁄20 troy ounce) in one troy pound (12 troy ounces) of the resulting alloy. Britannia silver has a fineness of 11 ounces, 10 pennyweights, or about
(
11
+
10
20
)
12
95.833
%
{\displaystyle {\frac {(11+{\frac {10}{20}})}{12}}=95.833\%}
silver, whereas sterling silver has a fineness of 11 ounces, 2 pennyweights, or exactly
(
11
+
2
20
)
12
92.5
%
{\displaystyle {\frac {(11+{\frac {2}{20}})}{12}}=92.5\%}
silver.

Firs are evergreen coniferous trees belonging to the genus Abies (Latin: [ˈabieːs]) in the family Pinaceae. There are approximately 48–65 extant species, found on mountains throughout much of North and Central America, Eurasia, and North Africa. The genus is most closely related to Keteleeria, a small genus confined to eastern Asia.
They are tall trees that can be distinguished from other members of the pine family by the way in which their needle-like leaves are attached singly to the branches with a circular base, and by their cones, which, like those of cedars, stand upright on the branches like candles and disintegrate at maturity.
The wood of firs is used for pulp to make paper, for plywood, and for indoor construction. Some species serve as Christmas trees, while others are used as decorative trees with their brightly coloured cones. In art, Lucas Cranach the Elder painted Madonna under the fir tree for Wrocław Cathedral in 1510.
Etymology
The English name "fir" derives from the Old Norse fyri or the Old Danish fyr. The generic name Abies is the Latin for "fir".
Description
Fir trees are tall, often 40–60 metres and sometimes approaching 100 metres high, usually with a single straight trunk. The crown starts conical, but becomes more varied in shape with age. The primary branches are arranged in whorls around the trunk.
Leaves
Firs have needle-like leaves, arranged spirally but often appearing to be in two or more rows on opposite sides of the twigs. The base of each leaf is round and attached to a small pit in the twig. Each leaf is normally twisted at its base so that the side with stomata faces downwards. In the upper crown on cone-bearing branches, the leaves are shorter, curved, and sometimes sharp.
Cones
Firs differ from other conifers such as spruces in having erect, cylindrical female seed cones 5–25 cm (2–10 in) long that disintegrate at maturity to release the winged seeds. Seed cones take a year to become mature; they start out green or other bright colour, darkening as they develop to dark brown or black. The leaflike seed bracts are visible when young, and in some species remain so. The seeds sit in thin cups; each seed has a triangle-shaped wing. The male cones are pendulous (dangling) and resemble catkins; both pollen and seeds are wind-dispersed.
Evolution
Fossil history
The oldest pollen assignable to the genus dates to the Late Cretaceous in Siberia, with records of leaves and reproductive organs across the Northern Hemisphere from the Eocene onwards.
External phylogeny
Based on transcriptome analysis, Keteleeria is sister to Abies, with the Pseudolariceae the next nearest relatives.
Internal phylogeny
Phylogeny of Abies based on phylogenomic analysis in 2021:
Taxonomy
Taxonomic history
In 1754, Philip Miller set up the genus Abies; he also defined the type species Abies alba. In 1878, George Engelmann classified only a part of the genus; Heinrich Mayr did the same in 1890, as did the German botanist Wilhelm Patschke in 1913. The classifications by Paul Robert Hickel in 1906 to 1908, and by P. Landry in 1984, made use only of a subset of the available morphological characteristics. In 1990 and 2001, the Dutch botanist Aljos Farjon attempted a more complete classification; he accepted 48 species within the genus; in 2017 he reduced this to 46. Adopting a different approach, in 2011 Z. Debreczy and I. Rácz treated the genus as containing 67 species.
Species
As of September 2025, Plants of the World Online accepted 49 species. The sections are based on Stull et al. 2021.
Section Abies is found in central, south, and eastern Europe and Asia Minor.
Abies alba – silver fir or European silver fir
Abies nebrodensis – Sicilian fir
Abies borisii-regis – Bulgarian fir
Abies cephalonica – Greek fir
Abies nordmanniana – Caucasian fir or Nordmann fir
Abies nordmanniana subsp. equi-trojani – Kazdağı fir, Turkish fir
Abies pinsapo – Spanish fir
Abies pinsapo var. marocana – Moroccan fir
Abies numidica – Algerian fir
Abies cilicica – Syrian fir
Section Balsamea is found in northern Asia and North America, and high mountains further south.
Abies fraseri – Fraser's fir
Abies balsamea – balsam fir
Abies balsamea var. phanerolepis – bracted balsam fir
Abies lasiocarpa – subalpine fir
Abies lasiocarpa var. arizonica – corkbark fir
Abies lasiocarpa var. bifolia – Rocky Mountains subalpine fir
Abies sibirica – Siberian fir
Abies sibirica var. semenovii
Abies sachalinensis – Sakhalin fir
Abies koreana – Korean fir
Abies nephrolepis – Khinghan fir
Abies veitchii – Veitch's fir
Abies veitchii var. sikokiana – Shikoku fir
Section Grandis is found in western North America to Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador, in lowlands in the north, moderate altitudes in south.
Abies grandis – grand fir or giant fir
Abies grandis var. grandis – Coast grand fir
Abies grandis var. idahoensis – interior grand fir
Abies concolor – white fir
Abies concolor subsp. concolor – Rocky Mountain white fir or Colorado white fir
Abies concolor subsp. lowiana – Low's white fir or Sierra Nevada white fir
Abies durangensis – Durango fir
Abies durangensis var. coahuilensis – Coahuila fir
Abies flinckii – Jalisco fir
Abies guatemalensis – Guatemalan fir
Abies guatemalensis var. guatemalensis
Abies guatemalensis var. jaliscana
Abies vejarii
Section Momi is found in east and central Asia and the Himalaya, generally at low to moderate altitudes.
Abies kawakamii – Taiwan fir
Abies homolepis – Nikko fir
Abies recurvata – Min fir
Abies recurvata var. ernestii – Min fir
Abies firma – Momi fir
Abies beshanzuensis – Baishanzu fir
Abies holophylla – Manchurian fir
Abies chensiensis – Shensi fir
Abies chensiensis subsp. salouenensis – Salween fir
Abies pindrow – Pindrow fir
Abies ziyuanensis – Ziyuan fir
Section Amabilis is found in the Pacific Coast mountains in North America and Japan, in high rainfall areas.
Abies amabilis – Pacific silver fir
Abies mariesii – Maries' fir
Section Pseudopicea is found in the Sino – Himalayan mountains at high altitudes.
Abies delavayi – Delavay's fir
Abies delavayi var. nukiangensis
Abies delavayi var. motuoensis
Abies delavayi subsp. fansipanensis
Abies fabri – Faber's fir
Abies fabri subsp. minensis
Abies forrestii – Forrest's fir
Abies densa – Bhutan fir
Abies spectabilis – East Himalayan fir
Abies fargesii – Farges' fir
Abies fanjingshanensis – Fanjingshan fir
Abies yuanbaoshanensis – Yuanbaoshan fir
Abies squamata – flaky fir
Section Oiamel is found in central Mexico at high altitudes.
Abies religiosa – sacred fir
Abies hickelii – Hickel's fir
Abies hickelii var. oaxacana – Oaxaca fir
Section Nobilis (western U.S., high altitudes)
Abies procera – noble fir
Abies magnifica – red fir
Abies magnifica var. shastensis – Shasta red fir
Section Bracteata (California coast)
Abies bracteata – bristlecone fir
?†Abies rigida Frank Knowlton - (Priabonian-Chattian; Colorado)
Section Incertae sedis
†Abies milleri – (Extinct) Early Eocene
Ecology
Distribution and habitat
Firs are distributed around the Northern Hemisphere. The genus is native across much of North America, Eurasia, Turkey, Syria, Morocco, and Algeria. It is introduced in Scandinavia and the British Isles. Abies sibirica grows as far north as 67°N in Siberia, while A. guatemalensis grows as far south as 15°N in Central America. Most firs favour cold climates, whether at altitude in mountain ranges or at high latitude. Many species have relict distributions, occupying small areas of what were once much larger distributions. Only a few species are widespread.
Abies religiosa (sacred fir) trees give roosting shelter to overwintering monarch butterflies.
Pests and diseases
Firs are hosts to a variety of invertebrate pests and fungal diseases. Pest groups include adelgid bugs, aphids, bark beetles, clearwing moths, conifer twig weevils, caterpillars of some moths, nematodes, sawflies, spider mites, and spittlebugs. Diseases of firs include annosus (Heterobasidion) root rot, cankers, and needle cast.
Uses
Unlike the Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga), firs produce softwood, often used as pulp or for the manufacture of plywood and rough timber. It is commonly used in Canadian Lumber Standard graded wood, used for internal stud walls and similar applications. Abies spectabilis is used in Ayurveda as an antitussive (cough suppressant) drug. Firs produce a variety of terpenoids that could have practical uses. Terpenoid composition of the bark varies by genetics, geography, age and size of the tree.
Caucasian fir, noble fir, Fraser's fir and balsam fir are popular Christmas trees, generally considered to be the best for this purpose, with aromatic foliage that does not shed many needles on drying out. Many form decorative garden trees, notably Korean fir and Fraser's fir, which produce brightly coloured cones even when very young, still only 1–2 m (3 ft 3 in – 6 ft 7 in) tall. Many fir species are grown in botanic gardens and other specialist tree collections in Europe and North America.
In art
Lucas Cranach the Elder painted Madonna under the fir tree for Wrocław Cathedral in 1510. The painting was taken to Germany after the Second World War for restoration, but a copy was made and substituted for the original. The forgery was discovered, partly because the copy was on a fir board where the original was on lime wood. The original was returned to Poland in 2012, the most valuable painting to be restituted to the country.

Fire clay is a range of refractory clays used in the manufacture of ceramics, especially fire brick. The United States Environmental Protection Agency defines fire clay very generally as a "mineral aggregate composed of hydrous silicates of aluminium (Al2O3·2SiO2·2H2O) with or without free silica."
Properties
High-grade fire clays can withstand temperatures of 1,775 °C (3,227 °F), but to be referred to as a "fire clay" the material must withstand a minimum temperature of 1,515 °C (2,759 °F). Fire clays range from flint clays to plastic fire clays, but there are semi-flint and semi-plastic fire clays as well. Fire clays consist of natural argillaceous materials, mostly kaolinite group clays, along with fine-grained micas and quartz, and may also contain organic matter and sulphur compounds.
Fire clay is resistant to high temperatures, having fusion points higher than 1,600 °C (2,910 °F); therefore it is suitable for lining furnaces, as fire brick, and for manufacture of utensils used in the metalworking industries, such as crucibles, saggars, retorts, and glassware. Its stability during firing in the kiln means that it can be used to make complex items of pottery such as pipes and sanitary ware.
Chemical composition
The chemical composition typical for fire clays are 23-34% Al2O3, 50-60% SiO2, 6-27% ignition loss and various amounts of Fe2O3, CaO, MgO, K2O, Na2O, and TiO2. Chemical analyses from two 19th-century sources, shown in table below, are somewhat lower in alumina although a more contemporary source quotes analyses that are closer.
Extraction
Unlike conventional brick-making clay, some fire clays (especially flint clays) are mined at depth, found as a seatearth, the underclay associated with coal measures. Though many are extracted through open pit methods. Many fireclay deposits are associated with coal even if the seam is small and of low quality but not all fire clays form around coal. While many commercial mines focus on huge deposits sometimes spanning 100s of miles wide and meters thick found in sedimentary rocks associated with coals, formed by primary clay that has been eroded and transported downstream in a somewhat pure form or has been chemically weathered after deposition(from ground water itself or from the organic acids from said coal) . These deposits are similar to ball clay deposits in every way except iron content, particle size, and fired color . Although smaller deposits occur in innumerable spots across almost every U.S. state, as well as every country, these can occur as primary clay deposits from chemical weathering, much like kaolin deposits but from parent rocks with more iron. More commonly they occur in a wide variety of sedimentary rocks and can vary quite differently in terms of plasticity, color, sand content, and mineral content and can be found next to or within meters of clays of other or similar types. Many of these deposits were abandoned during the turn of the 20th century and lay abandoned still or covered by development .

A fire drill is a method of practicing how a building should evacuate in the event of a fire or other emergencies. In most cases, the building's existing fire alarm system is activated and the building is evacuated by means of the nearest available exits, as if an emergency had actually occurred. Fire drill procedures may vary depending on the building type, such as hospitals or high rise buildings, where occupants may be relocated within the building as opposed to evacuating the building. Generally, the evacuation interval is measured to ensure that it is fast enough, and problems with the emergency system or evacuation procedures are identified so that they may be remedied.
In addition to fire drills, most buildings have their fire alarm systems checked on a regular basis to ensure that the system is working. Fire alarm tests are often done outside normal business hours so as to minimize disruption of building functions; in schools, they are often done when students and staff are not around or during the holidays where specialist fire alarm engineers test alarms in the building for repair if needed.
History of fire drills
The purpose of fire drills in buildings is to ensure that everyone knows how to exit safely as quickly as possible if a fire, smoke, carbon monoxide, or other emergency occurs, and to familiarize building occupants with the sound of the fire alarm.
Before regular fire drills were instituted, an infamous fire broke out at the private Catholic school Our Lady of the Angels in 1958, in Chicago. Children on the second floor were trapped there, with neither teachers nor pupils knowing how to get out of the building safely. Many children jumped out of windows, and many were killed as they could not make their way to an exit. Although the school had passed a fire inspection only two months before, and had the number of fire exits and fire extinguishers required at the time, it lacked smoke detectors or adequate fire alarms, and was overcrowded.
The need for fire drills was recognized; monthly fire drills were implemented after the Our Lady of the Angels fire. It was found in a later study that education on fire also helped to prevent it: people started to learn more about what started fires, and what to do in the case of one starting. They were also aware of the hazards that allow a fire to start and grow. Within a year of the fire, many of the hazardous conditions such as found in Our Lady of the Angels had been eliminated in thousands of schools around the United States.
Other improvements in fire safety
After the fire at Our Lady of the Angels, state regulations required that there had to be fire alarm street boxes no more than 100 feet (30 m) from the front of the building. The General Assembly of Illinois also passed life safety codes in response to the fire at Our Lady of the Angels. Things such as more control over waste disposal, proper storage of combustible supplies, more frequent fire drills, and inspections were put in place. Other reforms triggered by the fire include the city of Chicago modifying the Municipal Building Code of Chicago, affecting fire safety of schools as well as other buildings with two or more stories.
To prevent fires and deaths caused by fires, schools must have an evacuation plan in place, and make sure that all the proper fire alarms and warnings work. Teachers must take charge of the situation and act as leaders. Teachers should also consider the number of students that they have, and the need for enough space and time to get all of the students out quickly and safely. Teachers should also be alert to the causes of fires, in order to try and stop them from happening.
Fire drill regulations
Many jurisdictions require that fire drills be conducted at certain intervals. This is the case in educational institutions, and also other workplaces and buildings. The frequency of such drills and what must be done during them may be laid down in statutes.
United States
In the United States, school fire drill regulations are set by individual states. While all mandate fire drills during the course of a school year, the frequency and number vary from state to state.
The following states require that schools conduct a fire drill once per month:
The following states require that schools conduct a specific number of drills over the course of the entire school year, or that a certain number of drills must be conducted within a certain period of time:
The following states specify a greater frequency of fire drills at the beginning of the school year:
Until regulations changed on November 1, 2010, New Jersey was unique in its requirement that schools conduct 2 fire drills per month. Under later requirements, one of the 2 fire drills was replaced by a monthly security drill.
United Kingdom
The National Union of Teachers requires that all schools, colleges and universities and any other education establishment perform a fire evacuation drill every term. It is required that most schools perform a fire drill at the start of the academic year. According to UK fire regulations, any new buildings that were built after the fire safety regulations changed in 2005, every room should have at least one fire alarm device such as a bell, a sounder (siren) or smoke/heat alarm installed. Regular safety checks such as testing fire alarms or smoke alarms and fire extinguishers should be performed weekly and does not require building evacuation. According to the Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005, all workplaces must have an emergency plan specifying staff actions, evacuation plans and arrangements for contacting the fire brigade.
New Zealand
The New Zealand Fire Service requires all schools and educational facilities to carry out a fire drill (termed a trial evacuation) at least once every six months, unless a shorter period is specified in the school's approved evacuation scheme. Schools need to give the Fire Service 7–10 working days' notice before a fire drill is planned, and must submit a report to the Fire Service within 7–10 working days of the drill; an unplanned alarm activation does not count as a fire drill.

In archaeology, fire-cracked rock (FCR) or fire-affected rock (FAR), is rock of any type that has been altered and split as the result of deliberate heating. It is a feature of many archaeological sites. In many cases, fire-cracked rock results when stones were used to line hearths and earth ovens or were heated to provide a longer-lasting heat-source (similar to a modern hot water bottle).
In other cases, fire-cracked rock results from stone being used to heat or boil water. The stones were heated and dropped directly into water held in containers made of skin or baskets and pottery. This use has led fire-cracked rocks to be called "pot-boilers" in Britain.
Central Texas in the United States in particular is well-known archaeologically for its burned rock middens, which are piles of fire-cracked rock—often exceeding several tons of material. These represent the remains of earth ovens used in cooking sotol bulbs and other plants during prehistoric times. In Britain, these features are referred to as "burnt mounds".
A fire-cracked rock bibliography has been compiled by William Doleman and published on the Tennessee Archaeology Net bibliography page

Fishing is the activity of trying to catch fish. Fish are often caught as wildlife from the natural environment (freshwater or marine), but may also be caught from stocked bodies of water such as ponds, canals, park wetlands and reservoirs. Fishing techniques include trawling, longlining, jigging, hand-gathering, spearing, netting, angling, shooting and trapping, as well as more destructive and often illegal techniques such as electrocution, blasting and poisoning.
The term fishing is also used more broadly to include catching aquatic animals other than fish, such as crustaceans (shrimp/lobsters/crabs), shellfish, cephalopods (octopus/squid) and echinoderms (starfish/sea urchins). The term is not normally applied to harvesting fish raised in controlled cultivations (fish farming). Nor is it normally applied to hunting aquatic mammals, where terms like whaling and sealing are used instead.
Fishing has been an important part of human culture since hunter-gatherer times. It is one of the few food production activities that has persisted from prehistory into the modern age, surviving both the Neolithic Revolution and successive Industrial Revolutions. In addition to fishing for food, people commonly fish as a recreational pastime. Fishing tournaments are held, and caught fish are sometimes kept long-term as preserved or living trophies. When BioBlitzes occur, fish are typically caught, identified, and then released.
According to the United Nations FAO statistics, the total number of commercial fishers and fish farmers is estimated to be 39.0 million. Fishing industries and aquaculture provide direct and indirect employment to over 500 million people in developing countries. In 2005, the worldwide per capita consumption of fish captured from wild fisheries was 14.4 kilograms (32 lb), with an additional 7.4 kilograms (16 lb) harvested from fish farms.
History
Fishing is an ancient practice that dates back to at least the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic period about 40,000 years ago. Isotopic analysis of the remains of Tianyuan man, a 40,000-year-old modern human from eastern Asia, has shown that he regularly consumed freshwater fish. Archaeology features such as shell middens, discarded fish bones, and cave paintings show that seafood was important for survival and consumed in significant quantities. Fishing in Africa is evident very early on in human history. Neanderthals were fishing by about 200,000 BC. People could have developed basketry for fish traps, using spinning and early forms of knitting to make fishing nets able to catch more fish.
During this period, most people lived a hunter-gatherer lifestyle and were, of necessity, constantly on the move. However, where there are early examples of permanent settlements (though not necessarily permanently occupied) such as those at Lepenski Vir, they are almost always associated with fishing as a major source of food.
Trawling
The British dogger was a very early type of sailing trawler from the 17th century, but the modern fishing trawler was developed in the 19th century, at the English fishing port of Brixham. By the early 19th century, the fishers at Brixham needed to expand their fishing area further than ever before due to the ongoing depletion of stocks that was occurring in the overfished waters of South Devon. The Brixham trawler that evolved there was of a sleek build and had a tall gaff rig, which gave the vessel sufficient speed to make long-distance trips out to the fishing grounds in the ocean. They were also sufficiently robust to be able to tow large trawls in deep water. The great trawling fleet that built up at Brixham earned the village the title of 'Mother of Deep-Sea Fisheries'.
This revolutionary design made large-scale trawling in the ocean possible for the first time, resulting in a massive migration of fishers from the ports in the south of England, to villages further north, such as Scarborough, Hull, Grimsby, Harwich and Yarmouth, that were points of access to the large fishing grounds in the Atlantic Ocean.
The small village of Grimsby grew to become the largest fishing port in the world by the mid 19th century. An Act of Parliament was first obtained in 1796, which authorised the construction of new quays and dredging of the Haven to make it deeper. It was only in 1846, with the tremendous expansion in the fishing industry, that the Grimsby Dock Company was formed. The foundation stone for the Royal Dock was laid by Albert the Prince consort in 1849. The dock covered 25 acres (10 ha) and was formally opened by Queen Victoria in 1854 as the first modern fishing port.
The elegant Brixham trawler spread across the world, influencing fishing fleets everywhere. By the end of the 19th century, there were over 3,000 fishing trawlers in commission in Britain, with almost 1,000 at Grimsby. These trawlers were sold to fishers around Europe, including from the Netherlands and Scandinavia. Twelve trawlers went on to form the nucleus of the German fishing fleet.
The earliest steam-powered fishing boats first appeared in the 1870s and used the trawl system of fishing as well as lines and drift nets. These were large boats, usually 80–90 feet (24–27 m) in length with a beam of around 20 feet (6 m). They weighed 40–50 tons and travelled at 9–11 knots (17–20 km/h; 10–13 mph). David Allen designed and made the earliest purpose-built fishing vessels in Leith, Scotland in March 1875, when he converted a drifter to steam power. In 1877, he built the first screw propelled steam trawler in the world.
Steam trawlers were introduced at Grimsby and Hull in the 1880s. In 1890 it was estimated that there were 20,000 men on the North Sea. The steam drifter was not used in the herring fishery until 1897. The last sailing fishing trawler was built in 1925 in Grimsby. Trawler designs adapted as the way they were powered changed from sail to coal-fired steam by World War I to diesel and turbines by the end of World War II.
In 1931, the first powered drum was created by Laurie Jarelainen. The drum was a circular device that was set to the side of the boat and would draw in the nets. Since World War II, radio navigation aids and fish finders have been widely used. The first trawlers fished over the side, rather than over the stern. The first purpose-built stern trawler was Fairtry built in 1953 at Aberdeen, Scotland. The ship was much larger than any other trawlers then in operation and inaugurated the era of the 'super trawler'. As the ship pulled its nets over the stern, it could lift out a much greater haul of up to 60 tons. The ship served as a basis for the expansion of 'super trawlers' around the world in the following decades.
Recreational fishing
The early evolution of fishing as recreation is not clear. For example, there is anecdotal evidence for fly fishing in Japan. However, fly fishing was likely to have been a means of survival, rather than recreation. The earliest English essay on recreational fishing was published in 1496, by Dame Juliana Berners, the prioress of the Benedictine Sopwell Nunnery. The essay was titled Treatyse of Fysshynge wyth an Angle, and included detailed information on fishing waters, the construction of rods and lines, and the use of natural baits and artificial flies.
Recreational fishing took a great leap forward after the English Civil War, where a newly found interest in the activity left its mark on the many books and treatises that were written on the subject at the time. Leonard Mascall in 1589 wrote A booke of Fishing with Hooke and Line along with many others he produced in his life on game and wildlife in England at the time. The Compleat Angler was written by Izaak Walton in 1653 (although Walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century) and described the fishing in the Derbyshire Wye. It was a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse. A second part to the book was added by Walton's friend Charles Cotton.
Charles Kirby designed an improved fishing hook in 1655 that remains relatively unchanged to this day. He went on to invent the Kirby bend, a distinctive hook with an offset point, still commonly used today.
The 18th century was mainly an era of consolidation of the techniques developed in the previous century. Running rings began to appear along the fishing rods, which gave anglers greater control over the cast line. The rods themselves were also becoming increasingly sophisticated and specialised for different roles. Jointed rods became common from the middle of the century and bamboo came to be used for the top section of the rod, giving it much greater strength and flexibility.
The industry also became commercialised – rods and tackle were sold at the haberdashers store. After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch which became a centre of production of fishing-related products from the 1730s. Onesimus Ustonson established his shop in 1761, and his establishment remained a market leader for the next century. He received a royal warrant from three successive monarchs starting with King George IV. He also invented the multiplying winch. The commercialization of the industry came at a time of expanded interest in fishing as a recreational hobby for members of the aristocracy.
The impact of the Industrial Revolution was first felt in the manufacture of fly lines. Instead of anglers twisting their lines – a laborious and time-consuming process – the new textile spinning machines allowed for a variety of tapered lines to be easily manufactured and marketed.
British fly fishing continued to develop in the 19th century, with the emergence of fly fishing clubs, along with the appearance of several books on the subject of fly tying and fly fishing techniques.
By the mid to late 19th century, expanding leisure opportunities for the middle and lower classes began to have an effect on fly fishing, which steadily grew in mass appeal. The expansion of the railway network in Britain allowed the less affluent for the first time to take weekend trips to the seaside or rivers for fishing. Richer hobbyists ventured further abroad. The large rivers of Norway replete with large stocks of salmon began to attract fishers from England in large numbers in the middle of the century – Jones's guide to Norway, and salmon-fisher's pocket companion, published in 1848, was written by Frederic Tolfrey and was a popular guide to the country.
Modern reel design had begun in England during the latter part of the 18th century, and the predominant model in use was known as the 'Nottingham reel'. The reel was a wide drum that spooled out freely and was ideal for allowing the bait to drift a long way out with the current. Geared multiplying reels never successfully caught on in Britain, but had more success in the United States, where George Snyder of Kentucky modified similar models into his bait-casting reel, the first American-made design in 1810.
The material used for the rod itself changed from the heavy woods native to England to lighter and more elastic varieties imported from abroad, especially from South America and the West Indies. Bamboo rods became the generally favoured option from the mid-19th century, and several strips of the material were cut from the cane, milled into shape, and then glued together to form the light, strong, hexagonal rods with a solid core that were superior to anything that preceded them. George Cotton and his predecessors fished their flies with long rods, and light lines allowing the wind to do most of the work of getting the fly to the fish.
Tackle design began to improve in the 1880s. The introduction of new woods to the manufacture of fly rods made it possible to cast flies into the wind on silk lines, instead of horse hair. These lines allowed for a much greater casting distance. However, these early fly lines proved troublesome as they had to be coated with various dressings to make them float and needed to be taken off the reel and dried every four hours or so to prevent them from becoming waterlogged. Another negative consequence was that it became easy for the much longer line to get into a tangle – this was called a 'tangle' in Britain, and a 'backlash' in the US. This problem spurred the invention of the regulator to evenly spool the line out and prevent tangling.
The American, Charles F. Orvis, designed and distributed a novel reel and fly design in 1874, described by reel historian Jim Brown as the "benchmark of American reel design," and the first fully modern fly reel.
Albert Illingworth, 1st Baron Illingworth a textiles magnate, patented the modern form of fixed-spool spinning reel in 1905. When casting Illingworth's reel design, the line was drawn off the leading edge of the spool but was restrained and rewound by a line pickup, a device which orbits around the stationary spool. Because the line did not have to pull against a rotating spool, much lighter lures could be cast than with conventional reels.
The development of inexpensive fiberglass rods, synthetic fly lines, and monofilament leaders in the early 1950s revived the popularity of fly fishing.
Techniques
There are many fishing techniques and tactics for catching fish. The term can also be applied to methods for catching other aquatic animals such as molluscs (shellfish, squid, octopus) and edible marine invertebrates.
Fishing techniques include hand gathering, spearfishing, netting, angling, bowfishing and trapping, as well as less common techniques such as gaffing, snagging, clubbing and the use of specially trained animals such as cormorants and otters. There are also destructive fishing techniques (such as electrocution, blasting and poisoning) that can do irreversible damage to local ecosystems by killing or sterilizing entire fish stocks, causing habitat destruction and/or upsetting the equilibrium of interspecific competition; such practices are often deemed illegal and may be liable to criminal punishment.
Recreational, commercial and artisanal fishers use different techniques and sometimes the same ones. Recreational fishers fish for pleasure, sport, or to provide food for themselves, while commercial fishers fish for profit. Artisanal fishers use traditional, low-tech methods for survival in third-world countries, and as a cultural heritage in other countries. Usually, recreational fishers use angling methods and commercial fishers use netting methods. A modern development is fishing with the assistance of a drone.
Why a fish bites a baited hook or lure involves several factors related to the sensory physiology, behaviour, feeding ecology, and biology of the fish, as well as the environment and characteristics of the bait, hook, or lure. There is an intricate link between various fishing techniques and knowledge about fish and their behaviour, including migration, foraging and habitat. The effective use of fishing techniques often depends on this additional knowledge. Some fishers follow fishing folklores, which claim that fish feeding patterns are influenced by the position of the sun and the moon.
Tackle
Fishing tackle is the equipment used by fishers when fishing. Almost any equipment or gear used for fishing can be called fishing tackle, although the term is most commonly associated with gear used in angling. Some examples are hooks, lines, sinkers, floats, rods, reels, baits, lures, spears, nets, gaffs, traps, waders, and tackle boxes. Fishing techniques refers to the ways the tackle is used when fishing.
Tackle that is attached to the end of a fishing line is collectively called terminal tackle. These include hooks, sinkers, floats, leader lines, swivels, split rings, and any wires, snaps, beads, spoons, blades, spinners and clevises used to attach spinner blades to fishing lures. People also tend to use dead or live bait fish as another form of bait.
Fishing vessels
A fishing vessel is a boat or ship used to catch fish in the sea, or on a lake or river. Many different kinds of vessels are used in commercial, artisanal, and recreational fishing.
According to the FAO, in 2004 there were four million commercial fishing vessels. About 1.3 million of these are decked vessels with enclosed areas. Nearly all of these decked vessels are mechanised, and 40,000 of them are over 100 tons. At the other extreme, two-thirds (1.8 million) of the undecked boats are traditional craft of various types, powered only by sail and oars. These boats are used by artisan fishers.
It is difficult to estimate how many recreational fishing boats there are, although the number is high. The term is fluid since some recreational boats may also be used for fishing from time to time. Unlike most commercial fishing vessels, recreational fishing boats are often not dedicated just to fishing. Just about anything that will stay afloat can be called a recreational fishing boat, so long as a fisher periodically climbs aboard with the intent to catch a fish. Fish are caught for recreational purposes from boats which range from dugout canoes, float tubes, kayaks, rafts, stand up paddleboards, pontoon boats and small dinghies to runabouts, cabin cruisers and cruising yachts to large, hi-tech and luxurious big game rigs. Larger boats, purpose-built with recreational fishing in mind, usually have large, open cockpits at the stern, designed for convenient fishing.
Traditional fishing
Traditional fishing is any kind of small scale, commercial or subsistence fishing practices using traditional techniques such as rod and tackle, arrows and harpoons, throw nets and drag nets, etc.
Recreational fishing
Recreational and sport fishing refer to fishing primarily for pleasure or competition. Recreational fishing has conventions, rules, licensing restrictions and laws that limit how fish may be caught; typically, these prohibit the use of nets and the catching of fish with hooks not in the mouth. The most common form of recreational fishing is done with a rod, reel, line, hooks and any one of a wide range of baits or lures such as artificial flies. The practice of catching or attempting to catch fish with a hook is generally known as angling. In angling, it is sometimes expected or required that fish be returned to the water (catch and release). Recreational or sport fishermen may log their catches or participate in fishing competitions.
The estimated global number of recreational fishers varies from 220 million to a maximum number of 700 million fishers globally, which is thought to be double the number of individuals working as commercial fishers. In the United States alone it was estimated that 50.1 million people engaged in fishing activities in both saltwater and freshwater environments.
Big-game fishing is fishing from boats to catch large open-water species such as swordfish, tuna, sharks, and marlin. Sportfishing (sometimes game fishing) is recreational fishing where the primary reward is the challenge of finding and catching the fish rather than the culinary or financial value of the fish's flesh. Fish sought after include tarpon, sailfish, mackerel, grouper and many others.
Fishing industry
The fishing industry includes any industry or activity concerned with taking, culturing, processing, preserving, storing, transporting, marketing or selling fish or fish products. It is defined by the FAO as including recreational, subsistence and commercial fishing, and the harvesting, processing, and marketing sectors. The commercial activity is aimed at the delivery of fish and other seafood products for human consumption or use as raw material in other industrial processes. In 2022 24% of fishers and fish farmers and 62% of workers in post-harvest sector were women.
There are three principal industry sectors:
The commercial sector comprises enterprises and individuals associated with wild-catch or aquaculture resources and the various transformations of those resources into products for sale.
The traditional sector comprises enterprises and individuals associated with fisheries resources from which aboriginal people derive products following their traditions.
The recreational sector comprises enterprises and individuals associated with the purpose of recreation, sport or sustenance with fisheries resources from which products are derived that are not for sale.
Commercial fishing
Commercial fishing is the capture of fish for commercial purposes. Those who practice it must often pursue fish far from the land under adverse conditions. Commercial fishermen harvest a wide range of aquatic species, from tuna, cod and salmon to shrimp, krill, lobster, clams, squid and crab, in various fisheries for these species. Commercial fishing methods have become very efficient using large nets and sea-going processing factories. Individual fishing quotas and international treaties seek to control the species and quantities caught.
A commercial fishing enterprise may vary from one person with a small boat with hand-casting nets or a few pot traps, to a huge fleet of trawlers processing tons of fish every day.
Commercial fishing gear includes weights, nets (e.g. purse seine), seine nets (e.g. beach seine), trawls (e.g. bottom trawl), dredges, hooks and line (e.g. long line and handline), lift nets, gillnets, entangling nets and traps.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the total world capture fisheries production in 2000 was 86 million tons (FAO 2002). The top producing countries were, in order, the People's Republic of China (excluding Hong Kong and Taiwan), Peru, Japan, the United States, Chile, Indonesia, Russia, India, Thailand, Norway, and Iceland. Those countries accounted for more than half of the world's production; China alone accounted for a third of the world's production. Of that production, over 90% was marine and less than 10% was inland.
A small number of species support the majority of the world's fisheries. Some of these species are herring, cod, sardine, anchovy, tuna, flounder, mullet, squid, shrimp, salmon, crab, lobster, oyster and scallops. All except these last four provided a worldwide catch of well over a million tonnes in 1999, with herring and sardines together providing a catch of over 22 million metric tons in 1999. Many other species as well are fished in smaller numbers.
Fish farms
Fish farming is the principal form of aquaculture, while other methods may fall under mariculture. It involves raising fish commercially in tanks or enclosures, usually for food. A facility that releases juvenile fish into the wild for recreational fishing or to supplement a species' natural population is generally referred to as a fish hatchery. Fish species raised by fish farms include salmon, carp, tilapia, catfish, white seabass and trout.
Increased demands on wild fisheries by commercial fishing has caused widespread overfishing. Fish farming offers an alternative solution to the increasing market demand for fish.
Fish products
Fish and fish products are consumed as food all over the world. With other seafoods, it provides the world's prime source of high-quality protein: 14–16 percent of the animal protein consumed worldwide. Over one billion people rely on fish as their primary source of animal protein.
Fish and other aquatic organisms are also processed into various food and non-food products, such as sharkskin leather, pigments made from the inky secretions of cuttlefish, isinglass used for the clarification of wine and beer, fish emulsion used as a fertiliser, fish glue, fish oil and fish meal.
Fish are also collected live for research and the aquarium trade.
Fish marketing
Fisheries management
Fisheries management draws on fisheries science to find ways to protect fishery resources so sustainable exploitation is possible. Modern fisheries management is often referred to as a governmental system of management rules based on defined objectives and a mix of management means to implement the rules, which are put in place by a system of monitoring control and surveillance.
Fisheries science is the academic discipline of managing and understanding fisheries. It is a multidisciplinary science, which draws on the disciplines of oceanography, marine biology, marine conservation, ecology, population dynamics, economics and management in an attempt to provide an integrated picture of fisheries. In some cases new disciplines have emerged, such as bioeconomics.
Sustainability
Stocks fished within biologically sustainable levels decreased from 90% in 1974 to 62.3% in 2021. Issues involved in the long term sustainability of fishing include overfishing, by-catch, marine pollution, environmental effects of fishing, ghost fishing, climate change, fisheries-induced evolution and fish farming.
Conservation issues are part of marine conservation, and are addressed in fisheries science programs. There is a growing gap between how many fish are available to be caught and humanity's desire to catch them, a problem that gets worse as the world population grows.
Similar to other environmental issues, there can be conflict between the fishermen who depend on fishing for their livelihoods and fishery scientists who realise that if future fish populations are to be sustainable then some fisheries must limit fishing or cease operations.
Animal welfare concerns
Historically, some doubted that fish could experience pain. Laboratory experiments have shown that fish do react to painful stimuli (e.g., injections of bee venom) in a similar way to mammals.
There is still some controversy about the exact nature of fish pain and consciousness, but among animal‑welfare bodies and most specialists the practical consensus is that fish very likely feel pain (though not necessarily as humans do), and that policies and practices should reflect that.
In large-scale operations like fish farms, stunning fish with electricity or putting them into water saturated with nitrogen so that they cannot breathe, results in death more rapidly than just taking them out of the water. For sport fishing, it is recommended that fish be killed soon after catching them by hitting them on the head followed by bleeding out or by stabbing the brain with a sharp object (called pithing or ike jime in Japanese). Some believe it is not cruel if you release the catch back to where it was caught however a study in 2018 states that the hook damages an important part of the feeding mechanism by which the fish sucks in food, ignoring the issue of pain.
When fishing there are high chances of catching other marine wildlife in a fishing net. There are over 100 different fishing regulations on paper for reducing this bycatch.
Plastic pollution
Abandoned, lost, or otherwise discarded fishing gear includes netting, mono/multifilament lines, hooks, ropes, floats, buoys, sinkers, anchors, metallic materials and fish aggregating devices (FADs) made of non-biodegradable materials such as concrete, metal and polymers. It has been estimated that global fishing gear losses each year include 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines used. Abandoned, lost, or otherwise discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) can have serious impacts on marine organisms through entanglement and ingestion. The potential for fishing gear to become ALDFG depends on a number of factors including:
Environmental factors are mostly related to seafloor topography and obstructions, although tides, currents, waves, winds, and interaction with wildlife are also important.
Operational losses and operator errors can occur even during normal fishing operations.
Problems such as inadequate fisheries management and regulations that do not include adequate controls can hamper collection of ALDFG (e.g. there may be poor access to collection facilities).
Gear loss resulting from conflicts primarily occurs (intentionally or unintentionally) in areas with high concentrations of fishing activities, leading to gear being towed away, fouled, sabotaged or vandalized. Passive and unattended gear such as pots, set gillnets and traps are particularly prone to conflict damage. In the Arctic, conflicts are the most common reason for lost gear.
Cultural impact
Community
For communities like fishing villages, fisheries provide not only a source of food and work but also a community and cultural identity.
Economic
Some locations may be regarded as fishing destinations, which anglers visit on vacation or for competitions. The economic impact of fishing by visitors may be a significant, or even primary driver of tourism revenue for some destinations.
Semantic
A "fishing expedition" is a situation where an interviewer implies they know more than they do to trick their target into divulging more information than they wish to reveal. Other examples of fishing terms that carry a negative connotation are: "fishing for compliments", "to be fooled hook, line and sinker" (to be fooled beyond merely "taking the bait"), and the internet scam of phishing, in which a third party will duplicate a website where the user would put sensitive information (such as bank codes).
Religious
Fishing has had an effect on major religions, including Christianity, Hinduism, and the various new age religions. Jesus was said to participate in fishing excursions, and a number of the miracles and many parables and stories reported in the Bible involve fish or fishing. Since the Apostle Peter was a fisherman, the Catholic Church has adopted the use of the fishermans ring into the Pope's traditional vestments.

In archaeology, a flake tool is a type of stone tool that was used during the Stone Age that was created by striking a flake from a prepared stone core.
People during prehistoric times often preferred these flake tools as compared to other tools because these tools were often easily made, could be made to be extremely sharp & could easily be repaired. Flake tools could be sharpened by retouch to create scrapers or burins. These tools were either made by flaking off small particles of flint or by breaking off a large piece and using that as a tool itself. These tools were able to be made by this "chipping" away effect due to the natural characteristic of stone. Stone is able to break apart when struck near the edge. Flake tools are created through flint knapping, a process of producing stone tools using lithic reduction.
Lithic reduction
Lithic reduction is the removal of a lithic flake from a larger stone in order to reach the desired tool shape and size. The beginning stone is called the flake lithic core. There are three steps to lithic reduction:
Hard hammer percussion is the first step. It involves knocking off the larger flakes to achieve the desired lithic core for the flake tool. In using hard hammer percussion the flake tools were made by taking metamorphic or igneous rock such as granite or quartz and striking it against the stone. This method was often used to flake large core flakes of hard rock.
Soft hammer percussion is the second step. It involves using a hammer made of bone, which was often antler, in order to knock off flakes from the lithic core. Animal antlers such as moose, deer and elk were often the most common ones used. It allows the user more control over the size and shape of the flake knocked off. Soft hammer percussion was also used when the stone was more brittle.
Pressure flaking is the final step. It involves using a piece of bone, antler, or piece of hardwood in order to have more control of the flakes knocked off of the lithic core. One simply applies outward and downward pressure to achieve the final flake tool.
Types of stone used to create flake tools
Certain types of stone work better for creating flake tools than others. There are two important characteristics when it comes to creating flake tools, cryptocrystalline and conchoidal fracture. Cryptocrystalline relates to a stone structure that is made up of such minute crystals that its crystalline structure is only vaguely revealed. These cryptocrystalline rocks are composed of microscopic crystal like patterns. Since these rocks are not composed of large quartz crystals, they often break as easily as glass and then make conchoidal fractures. Conchoidal fracture describes the way in which materials break when they do not follow the natural planes of separation. These fractures are described as curved. When the stone is struck, the blow from the strike is distributed onto the rock in an even fashion, giving the fracture a radial appearance. The production of these lithic tools is only made possible due to their ability to fracture in this way. Examples of such materials include fine-grained materials, such as carbonado, volcanic rocks, obsidian, onyx, and types of glass. These would all be excellent materials for creating flake tools.
How archaeologists study flake tools
Flake tools can teach us much about human history. Residue analysis can be done to learn what was processed by the flake tools. Use-wear analysis can give archaeologists an idea of what the flake tool was used for. Archaeologists also use a process called re-fitting. This is the technological process of putting rock shards back together in their original shape in order to get a good idea of how the tool was created. All of these processes can help us to understand our human ancestors and how, why and when they created flake tools. These flake tools also have characteristics that show that these tools were made as a result of human work instead of natural processes. Each flake has 5 different parts: the first of which is a bulb of percussion which can also be known as the bulb of force. The next being an eraillure which is a flake that has been taken off of the lithic bulb of percussion. The third part of the flake is the radial fissures. The next part of the flake is the ripple marks followed by the negative flake scars which are located on the dorsal side from earlier flake markings.

Flash smelting (Finnish: Liekkisulatus, literally "flame-smelting") is a smelting process for sulfur-containing ores including chalcopyrite. The process was developed by Outokumpu in Finland and first applied at the Harjavalta plant in 1949 for smelting copper ore. It has also been adapted for nickel and lead production.
A second flash smelting system was developed by the International Nickel Company ('INCO') and has a different concentrate feed design compared to the Outokumpu flash furnace. The Inco flash furnace has end-wall concentrate injection burners and a central waste gas off-take, while the Outokumpu flash furnace has a water-cooled reaction shaft at one end of the vessel and a waste gas off-take at the other end. While the INCO flash furnace at Sudbury was the first commercial use of oxygen flash smelting, fewer smelters use the INCO flash furnace than the Outokumpu flash furnace.
Flash smelting with oxygen-enriched air (the 'reaction gas') makes use of the energy contained in the concentrate to supply most of the energy required by the furnaces. The concentrate must be dried before it is injected into the furnaces and, in the case of the Outokumpu process, some of the furnaces use an optional heater to warm the reaction gas typically to 100–450 °C.
The reactions in the flash smelting furnaces produce copper matte, iron oxides and sulfur dioxide. The reacted particles fall into a bath at the bottom of the furnace, where the iron oxides react with fluxes, such as silica and limestone, to form a slag.
In most cases, the slag can be discarded, perhaps after some cleaning, and the matte is further treated in converters to produce blister copper. In some cases where the flash furnaces are fed with concentrate containing a sufficiently high copper content, the concentrate is converted directly to blister in a single Outokumpu furnace and further converting is unnecessary.
The sulfur dioxide produced by flash smelting is typically captured in a sulfuric acid plant, removing the major environmental effect of smelting.
Outotec, formerly the technology division of Outokumpu, now holds Outokumpu's patents to the technology and licenses it worldwide.
INCO was acquired by Brazil's Vale in 2006.

Flat sawing, flitch sawing or plain sawing is a woodworking process that produces flat-cut or plain-cut boards of lumber.
Process
After an initial cut through the diameter of a log, parallel cuts produce flitches: strips of lumber with consistent thickness. Two cuts on each flitch trim the bark from the sides, and reduces it to a standard board width with squared edges. Two more cuts at each end set the length.
Lumber can be quickly flat-cut with a side-by-side set of mechanical saws. A slower but sturdier method involves passing the log back and forth over a single saw.
To reduce buckling that may occur along the middle of flat-cut boards, the initial cut may be offset from the diameter, and resulting sections cut further before cutting the flitches.
Comparison
Flat-sawn wood often exhibits "flat-" or "slash grain", where the angle between the visible growth rings and the width of the board is 45° or less. This makes the wood vulnerable to deformation as it dries, or if later exposed to moisture. Flat-sawn wood is less stable than quarter sawn or rift sawn wood, but can be produced more quickly and at lower cost.
The face of the board may show curved grain, sometimes with intricate patterns.

Flint, occasionally flintstone (SiO2 ), is a sedimentary cryptocrystalline form of the mineral quartz, categorized as the variety of chert that occurs in chalk or marly limestone. Historically, flint was widely used to make stone tools and start fires.
Flint occurs chiefly as nodules and masses in sedimentary rocks, such as chalks and limestones. Inside the nodule, flint is usually dark grey or black, green, white, or brown in colour, and has a glassy or waxy appearance. A thin, oxidised layer on the outside of the nodules is usually different in colour, typically white and rough in texture. The nodules can often be found along streams and beaches.
When flint is broken or chipped, the pieces have sharp edges, making it useful as cutting tools, such as knife blades and scrapers. The use of flint to make stone tools dates back more than three million years; flint's extreme durability has made it possible to accurately date its use over this time. Flint is one of the primary materials used to define the Stone Age.
During the Stone Age, access to flint was so important for survival that people would travel or trade long distances to obtain the stone. Grime's Graves was an important source of flint traded across Europe. Flint Ridge in Ohio was another important source of flint, and Native Americans extracted flint from hundreds of quarries along the ridge. This "Ohio Flint" was traded across the eastern United States, and has been found as far west as the Rocky Mountains and south around the Gulf of Mexico.
When struck against steel, flint will produce enough sparks to ignite a fire with the correct tinder, or gunpowder used in weapons, namely the flintlock firing mechanism. Although it has been superseded in these uses by different processes (the percussion cap), or materials (ferrocerium), "flint" has lent its name as generic term for a fire starter.
Origin
The exact mode of formation of flint is not yet clear, but it is thought that it occurs as a result of chemical changes in compressed sedimentary rock formations during the process of diagenesis. One hypothesis is that a gelatinous material fills cavities in the sediment, such as holes bored by crustaceans or molluscs, and that this becomes silicified. This hypothesis would explain the complex shapes of flint nodules that are found. The source of dissolved silica in the porous media could be the spicules of silicious sponges (demosponges). Certain types of flint, such as that from the south coast of England and its counterpart on the French side of the Channel, contain trapped fossilised marine flora. Pieces of coral and vegetation have been found preserved inside the flint, similar to the way insects and plant parts are preserved within amber. Thin slices of the stone often reveal this effect.
Flint sometimes occurs in large flint fields in Jurassic or Cretaceous beds, for example, in Europe. Puzzling giant flint formations known as paramoudra and flint circles are found around Europe, but especially in Norfolk, England, on the beaches at Beeston Bump and West Runton.
The "Ohio flint" is the official gemstone of Ohio state. It is formed from limey debris that was deposited at the bottom of inland Paleozoic seas hundreds of millions of years ago that hardened into limestone and later became infused with silica. The flint from Flint Ridge is found in many hues, including red, green, pink, blue, white, and grey, with the colour variations caused by minute impurities of iron compounds.
Flint can be sandy brown, medium to dark grey, black, reddish brown or an off-white grey in colour.
Uses
Tools or cutting edges
Flint was used in the manufacture of tools during the Stone Age, as it splits into thin, sharp splinters called flakes or blades (depending on the shape) when struck by another hard object (such as a hammerstone made of another material). This process is referred to as knapping.
Flint mining is attested since the Paleolithic, but became more common since the Neolithic (notably among the Michelsberg culture and Funnelbeaker culture). In Europe, some of the best toolmaking flint has come from Belgium (Obourg, flint mines of Spiennes), the coastal chalks of the English Channel, the Paris Basin, Thy in Jutland (flint mine at Hov), the Sennonian deposits of Rügen, Grimes Graves in England, the Upper Cretaceous chalk formation of Dobruja and the lower Danube (Balkan flint), the Cenomanian chalky marl formation of the Moldavian Plateau (Miorcani flint), and the Jurassic deposits of the Kraków area and Krzemionki in Poland, as well as of the Lägern (silex) in the Jura Mountains of Switzerland.
In 1938, a project of the Ohio Historical Society, under the leadership of H. Holmes Ellis began to study the knapping methods and techniques of Native Americans. Like past studies, this work involved experimenting with actual knapping techniques by creation of stone tools through the use of techniques like direct freehand percussion, freehand pressure and pressure using a rest. Other scholars who have conducted similar experiments and studies include William Henry Holmes, Alonzo W. Pond, Francis H. S. Knowles and Don Crabtree.
To reduce susceptibility to fragmentation, flint/chert may be heat-treated, being slowly brought up to a temperature of 150 to 260 °C (300 to 500 °F) for 24 hours, then slowly cooled to room temperature. This makes the material more homogeneous and thus more knappable and produces tools with a cleaner, sharper cutting edge. If temperatures exceed this, the flint has a tendency to explode; therefore deliberate use of this technique suggests a strong understanding of pyrotechnology. The current earliest evidence of deliberately heat-treated chert comes from Hoedjiespunt 1 in South Africa, dating MIS- 5e (130-119 kya) which corresponds to the Middle Stone Age.
To ignite fire or gunpowder
When struck against steel, a flint edge produces sparks. The hard flint edge shaves off a particle of the steel that exposes iron, which reacts with oxygen from the atmosphere and can ignite the proper tinder.
Prior to the wide availability of steel, rocks of pyrite (FeS2) would be used along with the flint, in a similar (but more time-consuming) way. These methods remain popular in woodcraft, bushcraft, and amongst people practising traditional fire-starting skills.
Flintlocks
A later, major use of flint and steel was in the flintlock mechanism, used primarily in flintlock firearms, but also used on dedicated fire-starting tools. A piece of flint held in the jaws of a spring-loaded hammer, when released by a trigger, strikes a hinged piece of steel ("frizzen") at an angle, creating a shower of sparks and exposing a charge of priming powder. The sparks ignite the priming powder and that flame, in turn, ignites the main charge, propelling the ball, bullet, or shot through the barrel. While the military use of the flintlock declined after the adoption of the percussion cap from the 1840s onward, flintlock rifles and shotguns remain in use amongst recreational shooters.
Comparison with ferrocerium
Flint and steel used to strike sparks were superseded in the 20th century by ferrocerium (sometimes referred to as "flint", although not true flint, "mischmetal", "hot spark", "metal match", or "fire steel"). This human-made material, when scraped with any hard, sharp edge, produces sparks that are much hotter than obtained with natural flint and steel, allowing use of a wider range of tinders. Because it can produce sparks when wet and can start fires when used correctly, ferrocerium is commonly included in survival kits. Ferrocerium is used in many lighters, where it is referred to as "a flint".
Fragmentation
Flint's utility as a fire starter is hampered by its property of uneven expansion under heating, causing it to fracture, sometimes violently, during heating. This tendency is enhanced by the impurities found in most samples of flint that may expand to a greater or lesser degree than the surrounding stone, and is similar to the tendency of glass to shatter when exposed to heat, and can become a drawback when flint is used as a building material.
As a building material
Flint, knapped or unknapped, has been used from antiquity (for example at the Late Roman fort of Burgh Castle in Norfolk) up to the present day as a material for building stone walls, using lime mortar, and often combined with other available stone or brick rubble. It was most common in the parts of southern England where no good building stone was available locally, and where brick-making was not widespread until the late Middle Ages. It is especially associated with East Anglia, but also used in chalky areas stretching through Hampshire, Sussex, Surrey and Kent to Somerset.
Flint was used in the construction of many churches, houses, and other buildings, for example, the large stronghold of Framlingham Castle. Many different decorative effects have been achieved by using different types of knapping or arrangement and combinations with stone (flushwork), especially in the 15th and early 16th centuries. Because knapping flints to a relatively flush surface and size is a highly skilled process with a high level of wastage, flint finishes typically indicate high status buildings.
During World War I, in the chalky-soil country of France, the British filled sandbags with flint and used these sandbags as breastworks.
Ceramics
Flint pebbles are used as the media in ball mills to grind glazes and other raw materials for the ceramics industry. The pebbles are hand-selected based on colour; those having a tint of red, indicating high iron content, are discarded. The remaining blue-grey stones have a low content of chromophoric oxides and so are less deleterious to the colour of the ceramic composition after firing.
Until recently calcined flint was also an important raw material in clay-based ceramic bodies produced in the UK. In clay bodies, calcined flint attenuates the shrinkage whilst drying, and modifies the fired thermal expansion. Flint can also be used in glazes as a network former. In preparation for use flint pebbles, frequently sourced from the coasts of South-East England or Western France, were calcined to around 1,000 °C (1,800 °F). This heating process both removed organic impurities and induced certain physical reactions, including converting some of the quartz to cristobalite. After calcination the flint pebbles were crushed and milled to a fine particle size. However, the use of flint has now been superseded by quartz. Because of the historical use of flint, the word "flint" is used by some potters (especially in the U.S.) to refer generically to siliceous raw materials used in ceramics that are not flint.
Jewelry
Flint bracelets were known in Ancient Egypt, and several examples have been found.

In colloidal chemistry, flocculation is a process by which colloidal particles come out of suspension to sediment in the form of floc or flake, either spontaneously or due to the addition of a clarifying agent. The action differs from precipitation in that, prior to flocculation, colloids are merely suspended, under the form of a stable dispersion (where the internal phase (solid) is dispersed throughout the external phase (fluid) through mechanical agitation) and are not truly dissolved in solution.
Coagulation and flocculation are important processes in fermentation and water treatment with coagulation aimed to destabilize and aggregate particles through chemical interactions between the coagulant and colloids, and flocculation to sediment the destabilized particles by causing their aggregation into floc.
Term definition
According to the IUPAC definition, flocculation is "a process of contact and adhesion whereby the particles of a dispersion form larger-size clusters". Flocculation is synonymous with agglomeration and coagulation/coalescence.
Basically, coagulation is a process of addition of coagulant to destabilize a stabilized charged particle. Meanwhile, flocculation is a technique that promotes agglomeration and assists in the settling of particles. The most common used coagulant is alum, Al2(SO4)3·14H2O.
The chemical reaction involved:
Al2(SO4)3 · 14 H2O → 2 Al(OH)3(s) + 6 H+ + 3 SO2−4 + 8 H2O
During flocculation, gentle mixing accelerates the rate of particle collision, and the destabilized particles are further aggregated and enmeshed into larger precipitates. Flocculation is affected by several parameters, including mixing shear and intensity, time and pH. The product of the mixing intensity and mixing time is used to describe flocculation processes.
Jar test
The process by which the dosage and choice of flocculant are selected is called a jar test. The equipment used for jar testing consists of one or more beakers, each equipped with a paddle mixer. After the addition of flocculants, rapid mixing takes place, followed by slow mixing and later the sedimentation process. Samples can then be taken from the aqueous phase in each beaker.
Mechanisms
One mechanism for flocculation is coacervation.
Applications
Surface chemistry
In colloid chemistry, flocculation refers to the process by which fine particulates are caused to clump together into a floc. The floc may then float to the top of the liquid (creaming), settle to the bottom of the liquid (sedimentation), or be readily filtered from the liquid. Flocculation behavior of soil colloids is closely related to freshwater quality. High dispersibility of soil colloids not only directly causes turbidity of the surrounding water but it also induces eutrophication due to the adsorption of nutritional substances in rivers and lakes and even boats under the sea.
Physical chemistry
For emulsions, flocculation describes clustering of individual dispersed droplets together, whereby the individual droplets do not lose their identity. Flocculation is thus the initial step leading to further ageing of the emulsion (droplet coalescence and the ultimate separation of the phases). Flocculation is used in mineral dressing, but can be also used in the design of physical properties of food and pharmaceutical products.
Medical diagnostics
In a medical laboratory, flocculation is the core principle used in various diagnostic tests, for example the rapid plasma reagin test.
Civil engineering/earth sciences
In civil engineering, and in the earth sciences, flocculation is a condition in which clays, polymers or other small charged particles become attached and form a fragile structure, a floc. In dispersed clay slurries,
flocculation occurs after mechanical agitation ceases and the dispersed clay platelets spontaneously form flocs because of attractions between negative face charges and positive edge charges.
Biology
Flocculation is used in biotechnology applications in conjunction with microfiltration to improve the efficiency of biological feeds. The addition of synthetic flocculants to the bioreactor can increase the average particle size making microfiltration more efficient. When flocculants are not added, cakes form and accumulate causing low cell viability. Positively charged flocculants work better than negatively charged ones since the cells are generally negatively charged.
Cheese industry
Flocculation is widely employed to measure the progress of curd formation in the initial stages of cheese making to determine how long the curds must set. The reaction involving the rennet micelles are modeled by Smoluchowski kinetics. During the renneting of milk the micelles can approach one another and flocculate, a process that involves hydrolysis of molecules and macropeptides.
Flocculation is also used during cheese wastewater treatment. Three different coagulants are mainly used:
FeSO4 (iron(II) sulfate)
Al2(SO4)3 (aluminium sulfate)
FeCl3 (iron(III) chloride)
Brewing
In the brewing industry flocculation has a different meaning. It is a very important process in fermentation during the production of beer where cells form macroscopic flocs. These flocs cause the yeast to sediment or rise to the top of a fermentation at the end of the fermentation. Subsequently, the yeast can be collected (cropped) from the top (ale fermentation) or the bottom (lager fermentation) of the fermenter in order to be reused for the next fermentation.
Yeast flocculation is partially determined by the calcium concentration, often in the 50-100ppm range. Calcium salts can be added to cause flocculation, or the process can be reversed by removing calcium by adding phosphate to form insoluble calcium phosphate, adding excess sulfate to form insoluble calcium sulfate, or adding EDTA to chelate the calcium ions. While it appears similar to sedimentation in colloidal dispersions, the mechanisms are different.
Water treatment process
Flocculation and sedimentation are widely employed in the purification of drinking water as well as in sewage treatment, storm-water treatment and treatment of industrial wastewater streams.
For drinking water, typical treatment processes consist of grates, coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, granular filtration and disinfection. The coagulation and flocculation steps are similar, causing particles to aggregate and fall out of solution, but may use different chemicals or physical movement of water. A variety of salts may be added to adjust the pH and act as clarifying agents, depending on the water chemistry. These include sodium hydroxide, calcium hydroxide, aluminum sulfate, aluminum oxide, ferric sulfate, ferric chloride, sodium aluminate, with flocculant aids polyaluminum chloride, polyferric chloride. A variety of cationic, anionic, and non-ionic polymers are also used, typically with a molecular weight below 500,000. Polydiallyldimethyl ammonium chloride (polyDADMAC) and epiDMA (a copolymer of epichlorohydrin and dimethylamine) are common choices, though these can produce carcinogenic nitrosamines. Sand, powerdered activated carbon, and clay may also be used as nucleating agents; in some cases, these are re-used after extraction.
Biopolymers, especially, chitosan, are increasingly popular as environmentally friendly flocculants. Chitosan is not only biodegradable but also exhibits a unique ability to bind with a wide range of contaminants, including heavy metals and organic pollutants, effectively removing them from water sources.
Flocculation provides promising results for removing fine particles and treating stormwater runoff from transportation construction projects, but are not used by most state departments of transportation in the U.S. This may be due to regulative restrictions or insufficient guidance for soil sampling requirements in light of changing soil characteristics. States that must achieve a numeric turbidity limit are more inclined to use flocculants to ensure the appropriate level of treatment.
Deflocculation
Deflocculation is the opposite of flocculation, sometimes known as peptization. Sodium silicate (Na2SiO3) is a typical example. Usually, in higher pH ranges, in addition to low ionic strength of solutions and domination of monovalent metal cations, the colloidal particles can be dispersed.
The additive that prevents the colloids from forming flocs is called a deflocculant. For deflocculation imparted through electrostatic barriers, the efficacy of a deflocculant can be gauged in terms of zeta potential. According to the Encyclopedic Dictionary of Polymers deflocculation is "a state or condition of a dispersion of a solid in a liquid in which each solid particle remains independent and unassociated with adjacent particles (much like emulsifier). A deflocculated suspension shows zero or very low yield value".
Deflocculation can be a problem in wastewater treatment plants, as it commonly causes problems with sludge settling and deterioration of the effluent quality.

A flooded mine is one of the direct results of a mine's closure procedure. When a mine stops operating, its maintenance systems also stop, in which the dewatering systems are included. Without these systems the mine will get flooded by water that naturally occurs in rock formations in the ground.
Overview
Mining operations can occur over a long period of time, from several years to several decades, and in order to keep the mining operations running, water has to be removed from the mine as it accumulates. After the mine is closed, when its operational life ends, the maintenance systems stop, including the dewatering systems. Without dewatering, the mines tend to flood with surface and groundwaters in the lower levels and mined spaces, if there is not a drainage adit present.
The flooding process of an open-pit or underground mine can take from a several months period to more than a decade, depending on factors such as volume of open space in the mine, availability of infiltration water and on the nature of flooding - it can be uncontrolled, controlled or monitored.
Open pit mines
Flooding in open pit mines leads to the so-called pit lakes, where a wide range of creatures can be seen. The flooding process happens because the drainage wells or dewatering pumps are stopped and the open spaces are filled with groundwater and surface runoff from precipitation and water bodies (e.g. rivers). Waters quality in flooded open pit mines can range from drinking water quality to acidic waters that can kill animals if drunk.
Underground mines
Flooding in underground mines is usually controlled. These types of mines are not directly influenced by surface waters, so it is mainly underground water that plays a role in the flooding. One of the main reasons to let an underground mine be flooded is to avoid disulfide oxidation, and thus avoid acid mine drainage. Other important reason is safety: people coming to underground mines without safety precautions or the presence of dangerous mine gases.
The controlled flooding of underground mines usually follows these guidelines:
Removal of potential water hazards
Fill the surfaces that might collapse during or after the flooding process
Install water diversion systems
Install, at both the surface and underground, a system to monitor hydrogeological and geotechnical aspects
Make a projection of hydrological and hydrogeochemical development of mine waters
Reasons for mine flooding
There are a wide range of factors that lead to mine flooding. Six of those main reasons are:
The mine ceases to be economically important
Depletion of raw materials
Political reasons, war or accidents
Instability of the mine workings
Prevention of disulfide oxidation
Safety reasons
In some locations, there are discussions to use flooded mines for pumped-storage hydroelectric reservoirs, but finished projects are still missing.
Historical mine flooding disasters
Chasnala mine
Quecreek Mine
Wangjialing mine
Knox Mine
Milford Mine
Luotuoshan mine
Jiangjiawan Mine

Floor sanding is the process of removing the top surfaces of a wooden floor by sanding with abrasive materials.
A variety of floor materials can be sanded, including timber, cork, particleboard, and sometimes parquet. Some floors are laid and designed for sanding. Many old floors are sanded after the previous coverings are removed and suitable wood is found hidden beneath. Floor sanding usually involves three stages: preparation, sanding, and coating with a protective sealant.
Drum sander machines
All modern sanding projects are completed with specialized sanding machines. Drum sander machines come in two versions. There are 120 V and 240 V floor sanders. 240 V drum sanders are more powerful and remove more wood material than the 120 V machine. Most homeowners who want to refinish their floors themselves use the 120 V version as they are more readily available at tool rental stores. Belt sanders are preferred for the continuous sandpaper belt design to prevent sanding machine marks in floors. Feathering is an industry term used by handling the machine in such a way as to avoid deep scratch marks during start and finish. The belt sander was invented by Eugen Laegler in 1969 out of Güglingen, Germany. 90% of the area can be reached with the belt/drum sander. The remaining 10% left such as edges, corners, under cabinets, and stairs, are sanded by an edge sanding machine. A rotary machine known as a multi disc sander or buffer is then used for the final sanding steps. The buffers take abrasive discs, which rotate in same plain is the floor itself. The power of the stripping relies on the weight of the machine and therefore can be useful for surface treatments like buffing, light sanding or stripping old sealants. In the belt sanders the abrasive material is fitted and secured tight between a drum and a tension device. The belt moves vertically, along the grain of the floor surface, which assures a powerful stripping, good finish and a lasting abrasive. In drum sanders it is fitted just around the drum itself, which is less secure and retains a risk of leaving marks on a newly sanded surface.
A buffing machine is used also in the final stages of wood floor refinishing. This is a rotary machine with attached fine abrasives which helps remove differences between the vertical and horizontal circulations of the sanding drums and the disk of the edging machines. These fine abrasives also help to smooth the final finish by removing minor imperfections on the surface prior and between re-coatings.
Process
Preparation is the first stage of the wood floor sanding process. All nails which protrude above the boards are punched down. Nails can severely damage the sanding machines which are being used. Staples or tacks used to fasten previous coverings (if any) are removed to reduce the possibility of damage. Some brands or types of adhesives which have been used to secure coverings may need to be removed. Some adhesives, oils, and varnishes, will clog sandpaper and can even make sanding impossible.
After the floor is prepared, the sanding begins. The first cut is done with coarse-grit sandpaper to remove old coatings and to make the floor flat. The best method when using a drum sander is to start out with a lower grit belt sandpaper. For oak, maple, and ash hardwoods, It is recommended to start with 40 grit, then with each subsequent sanding pass, go up in sandpaper grit e.g. 60, 80, and finish with 100 grit. When wood floor planks are warped, cupped, or significantly uneven, it may require multiple passes. The differences in height between the boards are flattened uniformly. The large sanders are used across the grain of the timber. The most common paper used for the first cut is 40 grit. The areas which cannot be reached by the large sanders are sanded by an edger, at the same grit paper as the rest of the floor. If filling of holes or boards is desired this is the stage where this is usually done. 80 grit papers are usually used for the second cut. The belt sander is used inline with the grain of the timber in this cut. A finishing machine is then used to create the final finish. The grit paper used is of personal preference, however 100-150 grit papers are usually used.
The sanded floor is coated with polyurethane, oils, or other sealants. If it is an oil-based sealant, then it is highly poisonous, having a high volatile organic compound content, so wearing a suitable respirator mask is recommended.
Issues
Sanding removes all patina, and can change the character of old floors. The result does not always suit the character of the building.
Sanding old boards sometimes exposes worm-eaten cores, effectively ruining the floor's appearance. This can reduce the sale price, or even cause the floor to require replacement.
Sanding removes material, and timber floors have a limit to how much they can be sanded.
Improper sanding, often caused by using an inferior sanding machine, can lead to 'chatter marks'. These occur when the sander has not been correctly positioned over the area to be sanded, the edge of the sander catches and creates a rippling effect over the wood or parquet floor.
Often these marks can only be discerned after the stain or sealant has been applied.

The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) is a World Bank facility that supports developing countries in preparing for and implementing REDD+. It operates through trust funds administered by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) as trustee and is intended to support both REDD+ readiness activities and pilot approaches to results-based finance for emission reductions from the forest sector.
The facility has two main windows: a Readiness Fund focused on supporting readiness preparation and implementation, and a Carbon Fund intended to pilot results-based payments for verified emission reductions from the forest sector.
History
The World Bank’s board approved the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility in 2007 as part of the Bank’s carbon-finance activities, with an “official launch” planned for December 2007 during the UN climate conference in Bali (COP 13). The facility was designed as a partnership to help developing countries prepare for a future system of incentives to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, combining readiness support with a results-based finance window.
The facility began operating in 2008, with early governance decisions taken by the Participants Committee, including resolutions that set out aspects of facility governance and operations. The facility’s operating framework was subsequently consolidated in the Charter Establishing the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility, which defines the facility’s objectives, participation structure and the arrangements for its Readiness Fund and Carbon Fund windows.
In January 2013, additional donor funding of about US$180 million was announced for the facility’s forest carbon funds, described as increasing total resources to roughly US$650 million, including support for its Carbon Fund window.
Mandate and scope
Under the Charter, the FCPF is intended to assist eligible REDD country participants in developing capacity for strategic planning and implementation of REDD+, and to test approaches to performance-based payments for emission reductions in the forest sector.
Participation in the Readiness Fund and Carbon Fund is governed through standard legal agreements. For example, REDD country participation in the Readiness Fund is governed through REDD Country Participation Agreements between the participating country and IBRD as trustee, while Carbon Fund contribution arrangements are governed through Carbon Fund participation agreements and supplementary agreements for additional contributions.
Governance and structure
The Charter describes governance arrangements centred on participant decision-making bodies and a management function hosted by the World Bank, alongside trustee arrangements for the Readiness Fund and Carbon Fund.
The Charter establishes a Participants Assembly that meets annually and provides general guidance, and a Participants Committee that meets at least twice per year and takes decisions on matters such as selection of REDD country participants and approval of budgets and work plans for the Readiness Fund. The Charter describes decision-making rules for the Participants Committee, including efforts to reach consensus, quorum requirements, and voting procedures if consensus is not reached.
Transparency, observers and participation
The Charter provides for observer participation in Participants Committee meetings and describes categories of observers, including representatives of forest-dependent Indigenous peoples and forest dwellers and representatives of non-governmental organisations, alongside other observer categories described in the Charter.
A published selection process for an NGO observer describes how civil society organisations may select an NGO observer and alternate through a nomination and voting process intended to support liaison between the observer and wider civil society networks engaging with the facility.
The Charter also includes provisions on disclosure of potential conflicts of interest by Participants Committee members and procedures where a potential conflict exists.
Funding and donors
The facility’s financial structure includes separate trust-fund arrangements for the Readiness Fund and the Carbon Fund, with contributions governed by participation agreements and related instruments. The Charter also describes Carbon Fund governance through Carbon Fund Meetings and notes that the Carbon Fund may be organised in tranches, each established as a separate trust fund under the facility’s framework.
Implementation may involve delivery partners under transfer agreements that set out terms for fund transfers and operational requirements, including agreements between IBRD as trustee of the Readiness Fund and partner organisations such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The FCPF is financed through voluntary contributions from donor participants, administered as two separate World Bank trust funds aligned with its two main windows (the Readiness Fund and the Carbon Fund). A World Bank project paper described the facility as a partnership between forested developing-country participants and financial contributors from the public and private sectors.
In a 2012 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) global program review covering the facility’s early years, donor participants were reported to have pledged hundreds of millions of US dollars to the Readiness Fund, with a smaller number of donors accounting for a large share of contributions. Donor participants listed in the same review included Agence Française de Développement (AFD) and the governments of Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Contributions to the Carbon Fund were made by public-sector participants (including the European Commission and several governments) and, in the facility’s early years, also included a smaller number of private-sector and NGO participants. Private-sector participation in the Carbon Fund has been limited relative to expectations in the early period.
Workstreams and mechanisms
The FCPF operates through two trust-fund windows designed to support countries at different stages of REDD+ implementation: a Readiness Fund that supports preparation for a national REDD+ approach, and a Carbon Fund that pilots results-based finance linked to verified emission reductions from the forest sector.
Readiness Fund
The Readiness Fund supports REDD+ readiness by helping participating countries plan and build the institutional, policy and technical foundations needed to implement REDD+ at scale. As part of this process, countries typically consolidate proposed readiness activities and arrangements in a Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP), including elements such as consultation and participation planning, institutional responsibilities, and technical approaches that underpin REDD+ implementation.
Readiness submissions and subsequent updates are considered through facility review and decision-making processes, with documented assessments used to summarise key issues raised during review and to inform next steps for country readiness work.
Readiness activities may be supported through a delivery-partner model, in which partner institutions assist countries in implementing readiness work under the facility’s operational and reporting arrangements.
Carbon Fund
The Carbon Fund is intended to pilot results-based payments for emission reductions from the forest sector, linking finance to quantified performance by eligible forest emission-reduction programmes rather than treating readiness planning as the endpoint. Programmes seeking Carbon Fund finance are expected to meet methodological and accounting requirements, alongside social and environmental considerations relevant to results-based payments, as reflected in the Carbon Fund’s methodological framework.
Results-based payments under the Carbon Fund are linked to reported emission-reduction outcomes that are subject to independent validation and verification before payments are made, with verification findings used in the facility’s results-based payment process.
Carbon Fund methodological and verification guidance
For the Carbon Fund, methodological requirements and accounting approaches are set out in the Carbon Fund Methodological Framework. The facility has also published validation and verification guidelines for assessments linked to Carbon Fund activities.
Policies and safeguards
The FCPF adopted a "Common Approach" to environmental and social safeguards for implementation involving multiple delivery partners, intended to harmonise safeguard requirements for readiness activities supported through the facility.
The facility has also used guidance on stakeholder engagement in REDD+ readiness, including guidance developed jointly with the UN-REDD Programme that focuses on participation processes involving Indigenous Peoples and other forest-dependent communities.
Activities and country engagement
Under the Charter, Readiness Fund support is linked to readiness preparation and implementation processes described in facility documentation, while the Carbon Fund is intended to support results-based approaches for forest-sector emission reductions under Carbon Fund arrangements and related agreements.
Country examples
Ghana
In Ghana, World Bank implementation reporting for the Ghana Emissions Reductions Program describes preparation and early implementation work linked to a jurisdictional emissions-reduction programme in cocoa-forest landscapes, including development of programme instruments such as a benefit-sharing plan and Monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) arrangements. The programme was selected into the FCPF Carbon Fund and an Emission Reductions Payment Agreement (ERPA) was signed under the Carbon Fund framework, reflecting the facility’s approach of linking payments to verified emission-reduction performance rather than readiness planning alone.
Independent stakeholder-engagement guidance prepared for the programme has emphasised consultation and safeguards considerations in cocoa landscapes, including clarity on rights and benefit-sharing expectations among smallholder farmers and forest-dependent communities.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the FCPF Carbon Fund engaged with the Mai Ndombe Emission Reductions Program through a purchase/sale arrangement for verified emission reductions generated under the programme, illustrating the facility’s results-based contracting model at programme scale. Under the Carbon Fund’s framework, programme transactions are linked to reported emission-reduction outcomes that are subject to independent validation and verification before results-based payments are made, and require documented social and environmental management arrangements relevant to performance-based finance.
Independent policy analysis has highlighted that jurisdictional REDD+ programmes in the DRC operate in a context of longstanding governance and land-tenure constraints, which can complicate implementation, enforcement and benefit-sharing even where programme-level safeguards are specified.
Laos
Country-level research on Laos has analysed how REDD+ readiness processes linked to the FCPF Readiness Fund and subsequent preparation for results-based finance interacted with domestic forest zoning and land governance, reporting stakeholder concerns about participation and timing pressures in advancing REDD+ planning and technical work. Related analysis of REDD+ policy “translation” in Laos has described how competing storylines and administrative dynamics shaped how readiness outputs were framed and operationalised, affecting perceptions of inclusion and accountability in the readiness process.
Dominican Republic
FCPF readiness review materials for the Dominican Republic illustrate the facility’s assessment process for country readiness submissions and follow-up documentation, using published assessment notes to summarise key issues raised in review and recommended next steps for readiness work. More broadly, a 2012 Independent Evaluation Group global program review of the facility’s early period highlighted that readiness grant disbursement was slow and that implementation capacity constraints shaped the pace at which country readiness outputs translated into implementation, providing context for the facility’s early country pipelines across regions.
Results and evaluations
Evaluations
Independent evaluation work commissioned in the facility’s early years found that the FCPF had made significant progress on objectives related to providing financial and technical assistance for REDD+ readiness and disseminating knowledge, while progress on piloting performance-based payments and on livelihood and biodiversity objectives was at an earlier stage.
A 2012 Independent Evaluation Group global program review described the FCPF as an early platform for operationalising REDD+ readiness, including through international deliberations that produced detailed guidance and templates used by countries to develop readiness strategies, and through associated stakeholder-engagement guidance such as the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA).
The same review also highlighted constraints affecting performance and expectations in the first years of implementation, including uncertainty about the prospects for a large-scale compliance market for REDD+ credits, limited private-sector participation in the Carbon Fund at the time, high demand from participating countries relative to available implementation capacity, and slow disbursement of Readiness Fund grants in the early period.
Independent analysis
Independent scholarship discussing REDD+ institutions has described the FCPF (alongside the UN-REDD Programme) as one of the major multilateral platforms created to operationalise REDD+ through readiness support and pilot results-based payment arrangements.
A comparative governance study of international REDD+ “institutional elements” included the FCPF among the support and funding agencies assessed, using multi-year stakeholder survey research to examine perceived governance quality (such as participation, accountability and transparency) across institutions rather than treating the FCPF solely as a funding vehicle.
Country-level case studies have also examined how engagement with the FCPF Readiness Fund and subsequent preparation for the FCPF Carbon Fund can shape national REDD+ policy processes. In Laos, for example, published research analysed how FCPF-linked REDD+ processes interacted with domestic forest zoning and land governance, and reported stakeholder concerns about participation and timing pressures associated with preparing for results-based finance.
Criticism and challenges
Civil society organisations have at times raised concerns about how Carbon Fund decisions are made and how social and environmental risks are handled in higher-risk contexts, including questions about whether safeguards, participation and land-tenure issues are adequately addressed before results-based finance is advanced for pilot programmes.
Relationship to other REDD+ initiatives
The FCPF operates within a wider international architecture of REDD+ readiness support and forest-climate finance, alongside other multilateral initiatives that focus on building national strategies, institutions and measurement systems for REDD+ implementation, such as the UN-REDD Programme and the Forest Investment Program (FIP) of the Climate Investment Funds.
FCPF readiness processes have been used in parallel with UN-REDD support in a number of partner countries, and the initiatives have aligned parts of their readiness approach through shared tools and guidance. This included a joint FCPF/UN-REDD template for Readiness Preparation Proposals (R-PPs) and joint guidance on stakeholder engagement in REDD+ readiness.
For results-based finance, the FCPF Carbon Fund is one of several public mechanisms intended to link payments to verified emission-reduction outcomes from the forest sector. Comparative overviews of REDD+ finance discuss the Carbon Fund alongside other results-based initiatives and funds, including the World Bank's BioCarbon Fund and the Green Climate Fund’s REDD+ results-based payments pilot.
Donor governments have supported REDD+ through both multilateral channels (including the FCPF and other multilateral REDD+ funds) and bilateral programmes, which has shaped how countries combine readiness support and results-based finance across initiatives.

Forest reference emission levels (FRELs) and related forest reference levels (FRLs) are benchmarks used under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) for assessing performance in REDD+ implementation. They are expressed as tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) per year for a reference period and compared with emissions and removals reported for a results period.
Developing country Parties implementing REDD+ may submit proposed national FRELs and/or FRLs on a voluntary basis and when deemed appropriate. For results-based payments, each submission is subject to a technical assessment coordinated by the UNFCCC secretariat under decision 13/CP.19, part of the Warsaw Framework for REDD-plus. Parties may update reference levels over time using a stepwise approach that incorporates improved data and methodologies, while maintaining consistency with national greenhouse gas inventories.
Background
Within the UNFCCC framework for REDD+, developing country Parties aiming to undertake REDD+ activities are requested to develop several elements, including a national strategy or action plan, a national forest reference emission level and/or forest reference level, a national forest monitoring system, and a system for providing information on how safeguards are addressed and respected (see Cancún safeguards). The Cancun Agreements describe REDD+ implementation as a phased approach that begins with strategy development and capacity-building and evolves into results-based actions that should be fully measured, reported and verified; reference levels provide the benchmark against which reported results are assessed under UNFCCC decisions.
Definition and terminology
UNFCCC decisions and technical documents commonly refer to a "forest reference emission level and/or forest reference level" as the benchmark against which REDD+ results are assessed. At an expert meeting convened under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) in 2011, participants noted that the concepts required clarification and described differing interpretations of the distinction between FRELs and FRLs. One view treated the two terms as a single net number, using "forest reference emission level" when net emissions are estimated and "forest reference level" when net removals are estimated; another view associated "forest reference emission level" with emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and "forest reference level" with the "plus" activities (conservation, forest management and enhancement of forest carbon stocks). In practice, UNFCCC materials and UN-REDD technical syntheses often use the paired term "FREL/FRL" to describe the reference level communicated by a Party for technical assessment.
Because reported REDD+ results are assessed relative to the submitted benchmark, choices about the reference period, data sources, scope (activities and carbon pools), and any adjustments can affect the quantity of results calculated against a reference level, which has made transparency and documentation central themes in UNFCCC technical discussions.
Reference levels are typically presented as a yearly total (tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per year) for a chosen reference period and used as the benchmark for comparing emissions and removals reported for a results period when assessing performance in implementing REDD+ activities. UNFCCC decisions also call for reference levels to be consistent with a country's greenhouse gas inventory estimates and allow Parties to update them over time as data and methods improve.
Construction
Decision 12/CP.17 calls for forest reference emission levels and/or forest reference levels to be constructed and presented in a transparent manner and states that submissions should follow the most recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidance and guidelines, as adopted or encouraged by the Conference of the Parties.
In broad terms, reference levels draw on historical information, combining data on changes in forest area with estimates of emissions and removals. Approaches can also use averages or trends where transparently justified; country submissions have varied in scope and methods, and stepwise improvement has been used to incorporate better data and methods over time.
UNFCCC decisions call for submissions to summarise the key information used to construct the reference level. This includes the historical information relied on, the datasets and methods used (including key assumptions), the REDD+ activities and carbon pools covered (and reasons for omitting any), and the forest definition applied. The technical assessment considers, among other issues, whether the reference level is consistent with forest-related greenhouse gas emissions and removals in the national greenhouse gas inventory and whether the information is transparent and complete.
Decision 12/CP.17 agreed that a stepwise approach to developing national reference levels may be useful, enabling Parties to improve reference levels by incorporating better data, improved methodologies and, where appropriate, additional pools; it also invited developing country Parties to update reference levels periodically as appropriate, taking into account new knowledge, new trends and any modification of scope and methodologies. SBSTA discussions linked this approach to the idea that Parties may start with simpler estimates where data are limited and improve them over time as better information becomes available.
Decision 12/CP.17 also acknowledged that subnational forest reference emission levels and/or forest reference levels may be elaborated as an interim measure while transitioning to a national forest reference emission level and/or forest reference level, and that interim reference levels may cover less than a Party's entire national territory of forest area.
UNFCCC submission and technical assessment
Developing country Parties implementing REDD+ may submit proposed FRELs and/or FRLs on a voluntary basis and when deemed appropriate. The UNFCCC secretariat coordinates the technical assessment process, which is conducted once per year as a centralised activity. Decision 13/CP.19 provides for a facilitative, non-intrusive technical exchange of information during assessment, and includes steps such as sharing a draft report with the submitting Party and considering clarifications provided during the process.
Technical assessment reports illustrate how submissions can differ by scope and scale. For example, the report for Guyana assessed a national FREL that covered reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. The report for Colombia assessed an interim FREL for the Amazonia biome focused on deforestation, with forest degradation discussed as a candidate for future inclusion as methods and data improve and as Colombia transitions toward a national reference level. The report for Malaysia assessed a national FRL for sustainable management of forests in production forests within the permanent reserve forest, based on historical averages of net CO2 removals from forest growth and emissions from timber harvesting.
Relationship to results-based payments
Under UNFCCC decisions on results-based payments for REDD+, developing country Parties seeking to obtain and receive payments are expected to have key elements in place. These include an assessed forest reference emission level and/or forest reference level, alongside a national strategy or action plan, a national forest monitoring system and a system for providing information on how safeguards are addressed and respected; results-based actions are to be fully measured, reported and verified.
Challenges and critique
Several challenges have been identified in developing and updating reference levels. These include limits in historical data and monitoring capacity (which can increase uncertainty), difficulties in measuring forest degradation compared with more visible forest loss, and differences in the way "forest" is defined across national reporting systems (which can affect forest-area and deforestation estimates). UNFCCC decisions therefore require Parties to explain key choices used in constructing a reference level, including the forest definition applied and explanations where definitions differ from those used in national greenhouse gas inventories or other international reporting, and these issues may be considered during technical assessment.
Some analyses of reference emission level approaches have argued that the choice of reference period and baseline method can influence incentives. For example, a study comparing alternative approaches for setting reference emission levels argued that if reference levels are constructed by simple extrapolation of historical forest-area change, countries could behave strategically during the reference period to improve their starting position, creating perverse incentives (for example, higher deforestation rates during the reference period could make it easier to generate credits later). A policy-oriented report on reference levels cautioned that upward adjustments to historical baselines based on planned national policies can be overestimated, and argued that allowing such adjustments without empirical justification could undermine environmental integrity and the credibility of a REDD+ mechanism.
Related technical literature discusses nesting - approaches for relating project-scale REDD+ activities and baselines to larger jurisdictional programmes and their reference levels, including accounting arrangements intended to avoid double counting of emissions reductions across scales.

Forestry is the science and craft of creating, managing, planting, using, conserving and repairing forests and woodlands for associated resources for human and environmental benefits. Forestry is practiced in plantations and natural stands. The science of forestry has elements that belong to the biological, physical, social, political and managerial sciences. Forest management plays an essential role in creating and modifying habitats, and affects ecosystem services provisioning. A practitioner of forestry is a forester.
Modern forestry generally embraces a broad range of concerns, in what is known as multiple-use management, including: the provision of timber, fuel wood, wildlife habitat, natural water quality management, recreation, landscape and community protection, employment, aesthetically appealing landscapes, biodiversity management, watershed management, erosion control, and preserving forests as "sinks" for atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Forest ecosystems have come to be seen as the most important component of the biosphere, and forestry has emerged as a vital applied science, craft, and technology. The control of forests for timber production is known as silviculture, as practiced by silviculturists. Although forestry is a broader concept, the two terms are often used synonymously.
All people depend upon forests and their biodiversity, some more than others. Forestry is an important economic segment in various industrial countries, as forests provide more than 86 million green jobs and support the livelihoods of many more people. For example, in Germany, forests cover nearly a third of the land area, wood is the most important renewable resource, and forestry supports more than a million jobs and about €181 billion of value to the German economy each year.
Worldwide, an estimated 880 million people spend part of their time collecting fuelwood or producing charcoal, many of them women. Human populations tend to be low in areas of low-income countries with high forest cover and high forest biodiversity, but poverty rates in these areas tend to be high. Some 252 million people living in forests and savannahs have incomes of less than US$1.25 per day.
Science
Forestry as a science
Over the past centuries, forestry was regarded as a separate science. With the rise of ecology and environmental science, there has been a reordering in the applied sciences. In line with this view, forestry is a primary land-use science comparable with agriculture. Under these headings, the fundamentals behind the management of natural forests comes by way of natural ecology. Forests or tree plantations, those whose primary purpose is the extraction of forest products, are planned and managed to utilize a mix of ecological and agroecological principles. In many regions of the world there is considerable conflict between forest practices and other societal priorities such as water quality, watershed preservation, sustainable fishing, conservation, and species preservation.
Dendrology and silviculture
Dendrology is a subset of botany; it is the scientific discipline that studies woody plants (trees, shrubs, and lianas), specifically, their taxonomic classifications.
Silviculture on the other hand is the commercial practice of forest management , primarily for the production of timber.
Genetic diversity in forestry
The provenance of forest reproductive material used to plant forests has a great influence on how the trees develop, hence why it is important to use forest reproductive material of good quality and of high genetic diversity.
Genetic diversity is the differences in DNA sequence between individuals as distinct from variation caused by environmental influences. The unique genetic composition of an individual (its genotype) will determine its performance (its phenotype) at a particular site. Genetic diversity is needed to maintain the vitality of forests and to provide resilience to pests and diseases. Genetic diversity also ensures that forest trees can survive, adapt and evolve under changing environmental conditions. Furthermore, genetic diversity is the foundation of biological diversity at species and ecosystem levels. Forest genetic resources are therefore important in forest management.
Genetic diversity in forests is threatened by forest fires, habitat fragmentation, pests and diseases, poor silvicultural practices and inappropriate use of forest reproductive material. About 98 million hectares of forest were affected by fire in 2015; this was mainly in the tropical domain, where fire burned about 4 percent of the total forest area in that year. More than two-thirds of the total forest area affected was in Africa and South America. Insects, diseases and severe weather events damaged about 40 million hectares of forests in 2015, mainly in the temperate and boreal domains. The marginal populations of many tree species are facing new threats due to the effects of climate change. Most countries in Europe have recommendations or guidelines for selecting species and provenances that can be used in a given site or zone.
Forest management
Forest management is the branch of forestry concerned with the administration and running of commercial forests. It addresses silviculture, forest protection, and regulation. Its goals include management for timber, aesthetics, recreation, urban values, watershed management, wildlife, inland and nearshore fisheries, wood products, plant genetic resources, and other forest resource values. Economic and policy decision-making tends to prioritise market-based benefits such as timber production which has led to recent frameworks emphasising that forest management must account for non-market ecosystem services such as cultural, social, and ecological functions which are often underrepresented.
For example, forest management often involves addressing wildlife-forest interactions. Deer populations have been shown to limit forest regeneration and alter species composition by grazing on young saplings. As a result, forest management involves studying and accounting for these interactions. A follow up study looked at using understory plants such as Trillium grandiflorum as an indicator species to estimate deer browsing pressure and predict long-term impacts on forest health
Urban forestry
Urban forestry is the care and management of single trees and tree populations in urban settings for the purpose of improving the urban environment. Urban forestry involves both planning and management, including the programming of care and maintenance operations of the urban forest.
Forestry education
Forestry education includes training in general biology, ecology, botany, genetics, soil science, climatology, hydrology, economics and forest management. Education in the basics of sociology and political science is often considered an advantage. Professional skills in conflict resolution and communication are also important in training programs. In the United States, postsecondary forestry education leading to a Bachelor's degree or Master's degree is accredited by the Society of American Foresters. In Canada the Canadian Institute of Forestry awards silver rings to graduates from accredited university BSc programs, as well as college and technical programs. The International Union of Forest Research Organizations is the international organization that coordinates forest science efforts worldwide.
History
The first major works about forestry in the English language included Roger Taverner's Booke of Survey (1565), John Manwood's A Brefe Collection of the Lawes of the Forrest (1592) and John Evelyn's Sylva (1662).
Silvologists
Gabriel Hemery
Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf

Forestry laws govern activities in designated forest lands, most commonly with respect to forest management and timber harvesting. Forestry laws generally adopt management policies for public forest resources, such as multiple use and sustained yield. Forest management is split between private and public management, with public forests being sovereign property of the State. Forestry laws are now considered an international affair.
Governmental agencies are generally responsible for planning and implementing forestry laws on public forest lands, and may be involved in forest inventory, planning, and conservation, and oversight of timber sales. Forestry laws are also dependent on social and economic contexts of the region in which they are implemented. The development of scientific forestry management is based on the precise measurement of the distribution and volume of wood in a given parcel, the systematic felling of trees, and their replacement by standard, carefully aligned rows of mono-cultural plantations that could be harvested at set times.
Purpose
Forestry laws are intended to protect resources and prevent forest clearing, logging, hunting, and collecting vegetation. However, there are no clear limitations set within these laws in regards to allowable cuts, harvesting rotations, and minimum harvesting diameters. Forest management plans state goals for the upkeep of the land, as well as steps to achieve them. foresters create management plans that account for each differentiated forest itself.
In some cases, plans are made with the assumption that ecosystems within a forest are holding a steady state, separate from the forest that surrounds them. Many foresters who are in third world countries do not have the knowledge nor training to follow by all the guidelines when making a management plan.
Appropriate public policies and legislation serve to foster sustainable economic and social development in rural and urban areas. These policies work to safeguard the environment and protect flora, fauna and cultural heritage. Traditionally, environmental protection has been an element of forestry through emphasizing forest conservation and accounting for environmental impacts on soil and water. In common with other sectors, forestry has been affected by the emergence of environmental awareness and legislation in the last generation. This has brought greater emphasis on the protection of wilderness and aesthetic values.
Influences
Biological diversity and climate change have specifically influenced forest law. When forest management plans are created, biological diversity is represented in criteria for sustainability. Due to the Kyoto Protocol, the mitigation of climate change has become an objective of forest law and policy, complementing broader climate policies and programs. However, Rosenbaum and colleagues state that there is little legislation containing specific provisions for mitigating forest-based climate change.
The connections between forest and other areas of law have become more complex as they have grown in ambition and scope and as other areas directly and indirectly place guidelines on how forests are managed or used. Thus the links between a country's forest laws and its general environmental laws become more important as the environmental dimensions of forest legislation increase in complexity.
Forest legislation now recognizes the role of forests as a habitat for wildlife, a resource for grazing and agriculture, and a contributor to water and soil conservation. More recently, the general principles of environmental law and the more specific values of biological diversity have become a very visible part of forest law. The UN Forum on Forests, an intergovernmental policy forum created in 2000, has adopted resolutions on the sustainable development of forests, especially those on Social and Cultural Aspects of Forest and Traditional Forest-Related Knowledge.
International
Due to variations in nature, importance, role of forest resources and legal and institutional settings, forest law is not easily adapted between countries. The World Bank states that despite comparative studies of trends in forest legislation, there is a lack of practical guidance on how to assess improve the law.
Actual practices differ from one country to the next, however, in all cases public forests are viewed as a national resource, that is, the sovereign property of the state. For example, even though most forest land in the United States and Canada is privately owned, a considerable amount is held by the state as a "public good" but systematically leased to private timber producers. In India, the Raj took ownership of virtually all forests, declaring them to be "wasteland" and, therefore, unowned. In Indonesia, forests are legally state owned but are treated as private property, while in Brazil, the lack of national government renders forests open access commons. In this role, the conservation of forests is tightly linked to the production of timber and other commodities that generate both capital and jobs, and the economies of large regions are almost wholly dependent on natural resource production from those forests.
New forest laws have been adopted in Eastern European countries as part of their transition to a market economy. These laws had considerable effect on the structure of forest land ownership, improvements in management regulations, and modernization of the forest sector's institutional framework. New forest legislation has also been developed in several countries in Western Europe in order to adapt to changing economic conditions, social demands, and more political participation of interest groups and citizens at local and regional levels.
Economic and social context
The evolution of forest legislation in the European Countries indicates that understanding of how natural resources are to be used in a sustainable manner depends on a given economic and social context. The meaning of sustainable forestry is determined by local circumstances and their significance has considerably changed over time. Today sustainable management is understood as forestry practices which respect the naturally given potentials of the ecosystems and maintain the diversity of forests in their typical landscapes. They leave multiple options for an increasing production of wood, protection of the environment, and recreation.
Regulation of use
Public provisions referring to forest uses over more than one generation are among the oldest forms of long-term environmental policies. Customary law, codified in the 14th century, regulated forest uses in accordance with the demands and options of their times. An increasing number of forest and timber ordinances, issued from the 16th century onward, followed. Meeting local needs, long-term availability of raw materials and energy, and increased outputs through better forestry practices were the issues at stake. Legislation established the requirement of a continuous flow of wood production, which meant stopping exploitation of what was available. It recognized the long-term nature of forests, and promoted the involvement of several generations in forestry activities. Increasingly, it provided for planning and management, and for measures of regeneration and reforestation. This introduced principles of utilizing renewable natural resources as a requirement for sustainability as we understand it today.
United States of America Forestry Law
In the USA the Federal Government manages about 33% of forests, and 9% is managed by local governments. This accounts for 343,901,880 acres (1391722 kilometers) of forest land. Much of this land is made up of National Parks or National Forests which began with the establishment of Yellowstone National Park in 1872. After this, in 1891, the Forest Reserve Act was passed. The National Parks are managed by the National Park Service (NPS), which is a bureau of the Department of the Interior (DOI). National Forests are managed by the U.S. Forest Service (USFS), an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Economics
New policies place responsibilities for, and powers over, wood fuel management into the hands of economically interested individuals and the Forest Service. The Forest Service maintains complete control of all production and management decisions through required approval and through control of the rules by which production and management can take place.
The role of private forestry reaches up to over 80 percent of forest production in some countries. However, in many countries, private forestry has never been significant and, even when land has been privatized, the state has often retained the forests. In much of Africa, individual land ownership is relatively limited so that the closest approach to private forestry is usually community forestry (although South Africa and Eswatini, among other countries, have extensive private plantations). More recently, the values of farm forestry and of private capital and management have increased official interest in private forestry.
Illegal forestry activities deprive governments of billions of dollars in tax revenues, as well as cause environmental damage and threaten forests. Forest related corruption and widespread violation of forestry laws undermines the rule of law, discourages legitimate investment, and gives unfair advantages. Money generated from illegal forestry activities has even been used to finance armed conflict. Concern about the extent to which illegal logging has been contributing to forest loss has grown sharply since the 1980s. A very large proportion of the timber entering both national and international markets has been accessed, harvested, transported and traded in contravention of national law in countries such as Bolivia, Brazil, Cambodia, Cameroon, Colombia, Honduras, Indonesia, Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, and Russia.
The World Bank (2002) estimates that illegal logging results in an annual loss of around US$10–15 billion in developing countries worldwide. Although it is anticipated that better governance, increased rent capture by the state, and improved forest management can all benefit the poor indirectly, the direct impacts of illegal logging and forest law enforcement on rural livelihoods have not been a priority consideration to date.
Livelihood
The ways in which people use and value forests are changing. Growing populations, changing culture, technology, and science are increasing the demand for forest resources. In recent years forest laws around the world have been significantly revised in response to these changes. However, the lack of information about who really uses forests presents a major problem to forestry policy makers and supportive development agencies that are mandated to adopt a pro-poor approach. Without clear data it becomes all too easy to overlook the interests of lower income individuals when designing policy interventions aimed at improving forest management or asserting forest law. Some forest laws specifically favor poor rural households and ethnic minorities. Over the last few decades, many governments in Latin America recognized indigenous peoples' rights over large territories, but indigenous people often find it difficult to protect those territories from invasion by loggers, miners, and farmers.
According to the World Bank, "more than 1.6 billion people depend to varying degrees on forests for their livelihoods. About 60 million indigenous people are almost wholly dependent on forests. Some 350 million people who live in or adjacent to dense forests depend on them to a high degree for subsistence and income. In developing countries about 1.2 billion people rely on agroforestry farming systems that help to sustain agricultural productivity and generate income."
Schmithüsen et al., advocate for a rights-based approach to forestry management with emphasis upon strengthening human rights networks, improving the independence of the judiciary, promoting legal literacy among rural communities, and providing legal aid; rather than a singular focus on forestry laws. They state a rights-based approach should be linked to governance reform programs aimed at creating public accountability and transparency in the management of natural resources and should be developed through processes of broad engagement with civil society organisations and based on national governments' commitments to reform law.
A large portion of forestry legislation focuses on administrative requirements, fees, taxes, and property rights. The recognition of traditional-group rights to areas used in common, such as forest or pasture is still lacking, despite governments or colonial powers recognising individual claims, based on custom or usage, to land used for agriculture or housing. according to the World Bank. By treating such land as "empty" during the process of settling rights, governments around the world have vested in the state ownership of vast expanses of forest land.
Enforcement
Law enforcement is the last resort for obtaining compliance with the law. There are at least three approaches to overcoming the difficulties of proving offenses that have taken place in remote locations. One is to focus enforcement on more visible acts, such as transport. Another, common in civil law, is to make the official report of a sworn official admissible as evidence in further proceedings. This effectively shifts the burden of proof to the defendant. A third device is the use of evidentiary presumptions, which similarly shifts the burden of proof to the defendant.
In many countries the contrast between what forestry law prescribes and practical implementation may vary. Even where the law is strong, illegal behavior by both public and private actors often continues. The United Nations explains illegal behavior due to the lack of financial and human resources to monitor and control forest activities in, forest departments. As these forest activities occur in remote areas, government officials may be under immense pressure to condone violations, or engage in violations themselves; court systems are backlogged or bankrupt; the difficulties of daily life for the rural poor may overwhelm any likely risks associated with violating the law; etc.
These explanations underscore the point that while good forestry legislation is necessary, it is obviously not sufficient. The laws in many countries lie unused or underused for reasons like failure of political will, weak institutions, or even general disregard for the rule of law.
A dual approach of private as well as public law schemes might possibly become an interesting modern policy mix enhancing enforcement: private law certification schemes might support public regulations (f.i. DDS, due diligence systems, like the EU Timber Regulation).
History and development
Forestry management dates back to customary law codified in the 14th century. In 1992, representatives of 180 countries met in Rio de Janeiro to consider, among other things, the adoption of an Agreement on Forestry Principles. They adopted the Agreement on Forestry Principles, entitled a "Non-legally binding authoritative statement of principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests."
Scientific forestry was based on the precise measurement of the distribution and volume of wood in a given parcel, the systematic felling of trees, and their replacement by standard, carefully aligned rows of mono-cultural plantations that could be harvested at set times.
The tendencies that become apparent from recent changes in forest laws and regulations in several European countries show a variety of approaches and may be judged from different point of views. Relevant criteria for analysis on the advancement of legislation are consistency, comprehensiveness, subsidiarity, and applicability.
Consistency requires the compatibility of forest regulations with constitutional values and democratic rules, with national policies addressing land-use, economic development and environmental protection, and with international commitments and multilateral agreements. Comprehensiveness refers to the objectives of forest legislation with regard to forest protection and forestry development, to different types of forest tenures, and to the rights and responsibilities of various categories of forest owners. Subsidiarity relates to the role of forests as national, regional and local resources. It also relates to the double nature of forests as private production means that may be used according to the decisions of land owners and as resources that yield numerous benefits to the community. Subsidiarity indicates to what extent public programs support the activities of land owners. Applicability refers in particular to the organisational framework of public forest administrations in relation to changing responsibilities and tasks, and to appropriate forms of participation of forest owners and interest groups in regulating forest uses and management practices. Coordination of competencies among public entities is an important aspect in evaluating the applicability of new or amended regulations.

A forge is a type of hearth used for heating metals, or the workplace (smithy) where such a hearth is located. The forge is used by the smith to heat a piece of metal to a temperature at which it becomes easier to shape by forging, or to the point at which work hardening no longer occurs. The metal (known as the "workpiece") is transported to and from the forge using tongs, which are also used to hold the workpiece on the smithy's anvil while the smith works it with a hammer. Sometimes, such as when hardening steel or cooling the work so that it may be handled with bare hands, the workpiece is transported to the slack tub, which rapidly cools the workpiece in a large body of water. However, depending on the metal type, it may require an oil quench or a salt brine instead; many metals require more than plain water hardening. The slack tub also provides water to control the fire in the forge.
Types
Coal/coke/charcoal forge
A forge typically uses bituminous coal, industrial coke or charcoal as the fuel to heat metal. The designs of these forges have varied over time, but whether the fuel is coal, coke or charcoal the basic design has remained the same.
A forge of this type is essentially a hearth or fireplace designed to allow a fire to be controlled such that metal introduced to the fire may be brought to a malleable state or to bring about other metallurgical effects (hardening, annealing, and tempering as examples). The forge fire in this type of forge is controlled in three ways: amount of air, the volume of fuel, and shape of the fuel/fire.
Over thousands of years of forging, these devices have evolved in one form or another as the essential features of this type of forge:
Tuyere—a pipe through which air can be forced into the fire
Bellows or blower—a means for forcing air into the tuyere
Hearth—a place where the burning fuel can be contained over or against the tuyere opening. Traditionally hearths have been constructed of mud-brick (adobe), fired brick, stone, or later, constructed of iron.
During operation, fuel is placed in or on the hearth and ignited. A source of moving air, such as a fan or bellows, introduces additional air into the fire through the tuyere. With additional air, the fire consumes fuel faster and burns hotter (and cleaner - smoke can be thought of as escaped potential fuel).
A blacksmith balances the fuel and air in the fire to suit particular kinds of work. Often this involves adjusting and maintaining the shape of the fire.
In a typical coal forge, a firepot will be centered in a flat hearth. The tuyere will enter the firepot at the bottom. In operation, the hot core of the fire will be a ball of burning coke in and above the firepot. The heart of the fire will be surrounded by a layer of hot but not burning coke. Around the unburnt coke will be a transitional layer of coal being transformed into coke by the heat of the fire. Surrounding all is a ring or horseshoe-shaped layer of raw coal, usually kept damp and tightly packed to maintain the shape of the fire's heart and to keep the coal from burning directly so that it "cooks" into coke first.
If a larger fire is necessary, the smith increases the air flowing into the fire as well as feeding and deepening the coke heart. The smith can also adjust the length and width of the fire in such a forge to accommodate different shapes of work.
The major variation from the forge and fire just described is a 'backdraft' where there is no fire pot, and the tuyere enters the hearth horizontally from the back wall.
Coke and charcoal may be burned in the same forges that use coal, but since there is no need to convert the raw fuel at the heart of the fire (as with coal), the fire is handled differently.
Individual smiths and specialized applications have fostered the development of a variety of forges of this type, from the coal forge described above to simpler constructions amounting to a hole in the ground with a pipe leading into it.
Gas forge
A gas forge typically uses propane or natural gas as the fuel. One common, efficient design uses a cylindrical forge chamber and a burner tube mounted at a right angle to the body. The chamber is typically lined with refractory materials such as a hard castable refractory ceramic or a soft ceramic thermal blanket (ex: mineral wool). The burner mixes fuel and air which are ignited at the tip, which protrudes a short way into the chamber lining. The air pressure, and therefore heat, can be increased with a mechanical blower or by taking advantage of the Venturi effect.
Gas forges vary in size and construction, from large forges using a big burner with a blower or several atmospheric burners to forges built out of a coffee can utilizing a cheap, simple propane torch. A small forge can even be carved out of a single soft firebrick.
The primary advantage of a gas forge is the ease of use, particularly for a novice. A gas forge is simple to operate compared to coal forges, and the fire produced is clean and consistent. They are less versatile, as the fire cannot be reshaped to accommodate large or unusually shaped pieces. It is also difficult to heat a small section of a piece. A common misconception is that gas forges cannot produce enough heat to enable forge-welding, but a well-designed gas forge is hot enough for any task.
Finery forge
A finery forge is a water-powered mill where pig iron is refined into wrought iron.
Forging equipment
Anvil
The anvil serves as a workbench to the blacksmith, where the metal to be forged is worked. Anvils may seem clunky and heavy, but they are a highly refined tool carefully shaped to suit a blacksmith's needs. Anvils are made of cast or wrought iron with a tool steel face welded on or of a single piece of cast or forged tool steel. Some anvils are made of only cast iron and have no tool steel face. These are not real anvils, and will not serve a blacksmith as such because they are too soft. A common term for a cast iron anvil is "ASO" or "Anvil Shaped Object". The purpose of a tool steel face on an anvil is to provide what some call "rebound" as well as being hard and not denting easily from misplaced hammer blows. The term rebound means it projects some of the force of the blacksmith's hammer blows back into the metal thus moving more metal at once than if there were no rebound. A good anvil can project anywhere from 50 to 99% of the energy back into the workpiece. The flat top, called the "face" is highly polished and usually has two holes (but can have more or less depending on the design). The square hole is called the hardy hole, where the square shank of the hardy tool fits. There are many different kinds of hardy tools. The smaller hole is called the pritchel hole, used as a bolster when punching holes in hot metal, or to hold tools similar to how the hardy tool does, but for tools that require being able to turn a 360-degree angle such as a hold-down tool for when the blacksmith's tongs cannot hold a workpiece as securely as it needs to be. On the front of the anvil, there is sometimes a "horn" that is used for bending, drawing out steel, and many other tasks. Between the horn and the anvil face, there is often a small area called a "step" or a "cutting table" That is used for cutting hot or cold steel with chisels, and hot cut tools without harming the anvil's face. Marks on the face transfer into imperfections in the blacksmith's work.
Hammer
There are many types of hammer used in a blacksmith's workshop but this will name just a few common ones. Hammers can range in shape and weight from half an ounce to nearly 30 pounds depending on the type of work being done with it.
Hand hammer - used by the smith.
Ball-peen hammer
Cross-peen hammer
Straight-peen hammer
Rounding hammer
Sledge hammer - used by the striker.
Chisel
Chisels are made of high carbon steel. They are hardened and tempered at the cutting edge while the head is left soft so it will not crack when hammered. Chisels are of two types, hot and cold chisels. The cold chisel is used for cutting cold metals while the hot chisel is for hot metals. Usually, hot chisels are thinner and therefore can not be substituted with cold chisels. Also, many smiths shape chisels as to have a simple twisted handle as to resemble a hammer, they can be used at a greater distance away from the hot metals. They are very useful and found throughout the world.
Tongs
Tongs are used by the blacksmith for holding hot metals securely. The mouths are custom made by the smith in various shapes to suit the gripping of various shapes of metal. It is not uncommon for a blacksmith to own twenty or more pairs of tongs; traditionally, a smith would start building their collection during the apprenticeship.
There are various types of tongs available in the market.
(1) flat tong
(2) rivet or ring tong
(3) straight lip fluted tong
(4) gad tong
Fuller
Fullers are forming tools of different shapes used in making grooves or hollows. They are often used in pairs, the bottom fuller has a square shank which fits into the hardy hole in the anvil while the top fuller has a handle. The work is placed on the bottom fuller and the top is placed on the work and struck with a hammer. The top fuller is also used for finishing round corners and for stretching or spreading metal.
Hardy
The hardy tool is a tool with a square shank that fits in a hardy hole. There are many different kinds of hardy tools such as the hot cut hardy, used for cutting hot metal on the anvil; the fuller tool, used for drawing out metal and making grooves; bending jigs - and too many others to list.
Slack tub
A slack tub is usually a large container full of water used by a blacksmith to quench hot metal. The slack tub is principally used to cool parts of the work during forging (to protect them, or keep the metal in one area from "spreading" for example, nearby hammer blows); to harden the steel; to tend a coal or charcoal forge; and simply to cool the work quickly for easy inspection. In bladesmithing and tool-making the term will usually be changed to a "quench tank" because oil or brine is used to cool the metal. The term slack is believed to derive from the word "slake", as in slaking the heat.
Types of forging
Drop forging
Drop forging is a process used to shape metal into complex shapes by dropping a heavy hammer with a die on its face onto the workpiece.
Process
The workpiece is placed into the forge. Then the impact of a hammer causes the heated material, which is very malleable, to conform to the shape of the die and die cavities. Typically only one die is needed to completely form the part. Extra space between the die faces causes some of the material to be pressed out of the sides, forming flash. This acts as a relief valve for the extreme pressure produced by the closing of the die halves and is later trimmed off of the finished part.
Equipment
The equipment used in the drop forming process is commonly known as a power or drop hammer. These may be powered by air, hydraulics, or mechanics. Depending on how the machine is powered, the mass of the ram, and the drop height, the striking force can be anywhere from 11,000 to 425,000 pounds.
The tools that are used, dies and punches, come in many different shapes and sizes, as well as materials. Examples of these shapes are flat and v-shaped which are used for open-die forging, and single or multiple-impression dies used for closed die forging. The designs for the dies have many aspects to them that must be considered. They all must be properly aligned, they must be designed so the metal and the flash will flow properly and fill all the grooves, and special considerations must be made for supporting webs and ribs and the parting line location. The materials must also be selected carefully. Some factors that go into the material selection are cost, their ability to harden, their ability to withstand high pressures, hot abrasion, heat cracking, and other such things. The most common materials used for the tools are carbon steel and, in some cases, nickel-based alloys.
Workpiece materials
The materials that are used most commonly in drop forging are aluminium, copper, nickel, mild steel, stainless steel, and magnesium. Mild steel is the best choice, and magnesium generally performs poorly as a drop forging material.
Mythology
Various gods and goddesses are associated with the forge in a number of mythologies, such as the Irish Brigid, West African Ogun, Greek Hephaestus and Roman Vulcan.

Forging is a manufacturing process involving the shaping of metal using localized compressive forces. The blows are delivered with a hammer (often a power hammer) or a die. Forging is often classified according to the temperature at which it is performed: cold forging (a type of cold working), warm forging, or hot forging (a type of hot working). For the latter two, the metal is heated, usually in a forge. Forged parts can range in weight from less than a kilogram to hundreds of metric tons. Forging has been done by smiths for millennia; the traditional products were kitchenware, hardware, hand tools, edged weapons, cymbals, and jewellery.
Since the Industrial Revolution, forged parts are widely used in mechanisms and machines wherever a component requires high strength; such forgings usually require further processing (such as machining) to achieve a finished part. Today, forging is a major worldwide industry.
History
Forging is one of the oldest known metalworking processes. Traditionally, forging was performed by a smith using hammer and anvil, though introducing water power to the production and working of iron in the 12th century allowed the use of large trip hammers or power hammers that increased the amount and size of iron that could be produced and forged. The smithy or forge has evolved over centuries to become a facility with engineered processes, production equipment, tooling, raw materials and products to meet the demands of modern industry.
In modern times, industrial forging is done either with presses or with hammers powered by compressed air, electricity, hydraulics or steam. These hammers may have reciprocating weights in the thousands of pounds. Smaller power hammers, 500 lb (230 kg) or less reciprocating weight, and hydraulic presses are common in art smithies as well. Some steam hammers remain in use, but they became obsolete with the availability of the other, more convenient, power sources.
Processes
There are many different kinds of forging processes available; however, they can be grouped into three main classes:
Drawn out: length increases, cross-section decreases
Upset: length decreases, cross-section increases
Squeezed in closed compression dies: produces multidirectional flow
Common forging processes include: roll forging, swaging, cogging, open-die forging, impression-die forging (closed die forging), press forging, cold forging, automatic hot forging and upsetting.
Temperature
All of the following forging processes can be performed at various temperatures; however, they are generally classified by whether the metal temperature is above or below the recrystallization temperature. If the temperature is above the material's recrystallization temperature it is deemed hot forging; if the temperature is below the material's recrystallization temperature but above 30% of the recrystallization temperature (on an absolute scale) it is deemed warm forging; if below 30% of the recrystallization temperature (usually room temperature) then it is deemed cold forging. The main advantage of hot forging is that it can be done more quickly and precisely, and as the metal is deformed work hardening effects are negated by the recrystallization process. Cold forging typically results in work hardening of the piece.
Drop forging
Drop forging is a forging process where a hammer is raised and then "dropped" into the workpiece to deform it according to the shape of the die. There are two types of drop forging: open-die drop forging and impression-die (or closed-die) drop forging. As the names imply, the difference is in the shape of the die, with the former not fully enclosing the workpiece, while the latter does.
Open-die drop forging
Open-die forging is also known as smith forging. In open-die forging, a hammer strikes and deforms the workpiece, which is placed on a stationary anvil. Open-die forging gets its name from the fact that the dies (the surfaces that are in contact with the workpiece) do not enclose the workpiece, allowing it to flow except where contacted by the dies. The operator therefore needs to orient and position the workpiece to get the desired shape. The dies are usually flat in shape, but some have a specially shaped surface for specialized operations. For example, a die may have a round, concave, or convex surface or be a tool to form holes or be a cut-off tool. Open-die forgings can be worked into shapes which include discs, hubs, blocks, shafts (including step shafts or with flanges), sleeves, cylinders, flats, hexes, rounds, plate, and some custom shapes. Open-die forging is typically employed when the workpiece is very large or when only a small batch size is required. Open-die forging lends itself to short runs and is appropriate for art smithing and custom work. In some cases, open-die forging may be employed to rough-shape ingots to prepare them for subsequent operations. Open-die forging may also orient the grain to increase strength in the required direction.
Advantages of open-die forging
Reduced chance of voids
Better fatigue resistance
Improved microstructure
Continuous grain flow
Finer grain size
Greater strength
Better response to thermal treatment
Improvement of internal quality
Greater reliability of mechanical properties, ductility and impact resistance
"Cogging" is the successive deformation of a bar along its length using an open-die drop forge. It is commonly used to work a piece of raw material to the proper thickness. Once the proper thickness is achieved the proper width is achieved via "edging". "Edging" is the process of concentrating material using a concave shaped open-die. The process is called "edging" because it is usually carried out on the ends of the workpiece. "Fullering" is a similar process that thins out sections of the forging using a convex shaped die. These processes prepare the workpieces for further forging processes.
Impression-die forging
Impression-die forging is also called "closed-die forging". In impression-die forging, the metal is placed in a die resembling a mold, which is attached to an anvil. Usually, the hammer die is shaped as well. The hammer is then dropped on the workpiece, causing the metal to flow and fill the die cavities. The hammer is generally in contact with the workpiece on the scale of milliseconds. Depending on the size and complexity of the part, the hammer may be dropped multiple times in quick succession. Excess metal is squeezed out of the die cavities, forming what is referred to as "flash". The flash cools more rapidly than the rest of the material; this cool metal is stronger than the metal in the die, so it helps prevent more flash from forming. This also forces the metal to completely fill the die cavity. After forging, the flash is removed.
In commercial impression-die forging, the workpiece is usually moved through a series of cavities in a die to get from an ingot to the final form. The first impression is used to distribute the metal into the rough shape in accordance to the needs of later cavities; this impression is called an "edging", "fullering", or "bending" impression. The following cavities are called "blocking" cavities, in which the piece is working into a shape that more closely resembles the final product. These stages usually impart the workpiece with generous bends and large fillets. The final shape is forged in a "final" or "finisher" impression cavity. If there is only a short run of parts to be done, then it may be more economical for the die to lack a final impression cavity and instead machine the final features.
Impression-die forging has been improved in recent years through increased automation which includes induction heating, mechanical feeding, positioning and manipulation, and the direct heat treatment of parts after forging. One variation of impression-die forging is called "flashless forging", or "true closed-die forging". In this type of forging, the die cavities are completely closed, which keeps the workpiece from forming flash. The major advantage to this process is that less metal is lost to flash. Flash can account for 20 to 45% of the starting material. The disadvantages of this process include additional cost due to a more complex die design and the need for better lubrication and workpiece placement.
There are other variations of part formation that integrate impression-die forging. One method incorporates casting a forging preform from liquid metal. The casting is removed after it has solidified, but while still hot. It is then finished in a single cavity die. The flash is trimmed, then the part is quench hardened. Another variation follows the same process as outlined above, except the preform is produced by the spraying deposition of metal droplets into shaped collectors (similar to the Osprey process).
Closed-die forging has a high initial cost due to the creation of dies and required design work to make working die cavities. However, it has low recurring costs for each part, thus forgings become more economical with greater production volume. This is one of the major reasons closed-die forgings are often used in the automotive and tool industries. Another reason forgings are common in these industrial sectors is that forgings generally have about a 20 percent higher strength-to-weight ratio compared to cast or machined parts of the same material.
Design of impression-die forgings and tooling
Forging dies are usually made of high-alloy or tool steel. Dies must be impact- and wear-resistant, maintain strength at high temperatures, and have the ability to withstand cycles of rapid heating and cooling. In order to produce a better, more economical die the following standards are maintained:
The dies part along a single, flat plane whenever possible. If not, the parting plane follows the contour of the part.
The parting surface is a plane through the center of the forging and not near an upper or lower edge.
Adequate draft is provided; usually at least 3° for aluminium and 5° to 7° for steel.
Generous fillets and radii are used.
Ribs are low and wide.
The various sections are balanced to avoid extreme difference in metal flow.
Full advantage is taken of fiber flow lines.
Dimensional tolerances are not closer than necessary.
Barrelling occurs when, due to friction between the work piece and the die or punch, the work piece bulges at its centre in such a way as to resemble a barrel. This leads to the central part of the work piece to come in contact with the sides of the die sooner than if there were no friction present, creating a much greater increase in the pressure required for the punch to finish the forging.
The dimensional tolerances of a steel part produced using the impression-die forging method are outlined in the table below. The dimensions across the parting plane are affected by the closure of the dies, and are therefore dependent on die wear and the thickness of the final flash. Dimensions that are completely contained within a single die segment or half can be maintained at a significantly greater level of accuracy.
A lubricant is used when forging to reduce friction and wear. It is also used as a thermal barrier to restrict heat transfer from the workpiece to the die. Finally, the lubricant acts as a parting compound to prevent the part from sticking in the dies.
Press forging
Press forging works by slowly applying a continuous pressure or force, which differs from the near-instantaneous impact of drop-hammer forging. The amount of time the dies are in contact with the workpiece is measured in seconds (as compared to the milliseconds of drop-hammer forges). The press forging operation can be done either cold or hot.
The main advantage of press forging, as compared to drop-hammer forging, is its ability to deform the complete workpiece. Drop-hammer forging usually only deforms the surfaces of the work piece in contact with the hammer and anvil; the interior of the workpiece will stay relatively undeformed. Another advantage to the process includes the knowledge of the new part's strain rate. By controlling the compression rate of the press forging operation, the internal strain can be controlled.
There are a few disadvantages to this process, most stemming from the workpiece being in contact with the dies for such an extended period of time. The operation is a time-consuming process due to the amount and length of steps. The workpiece will cool faster because the dies are in contact with workpiece; the dies facilitate drastically more heat transfer than the surrounding atmosphere. As the workpiece cools it becomes stronger and less ductile, which may induce cracking if deformation continues. Therefore, heated dies are usually used to reduce heat loss, promote surface flow, and enable the production of finer details and closer tolerances. The workpiece may also need to be reheated.
When done in high productivity, press forging is more economical than hammer forging. The operation also creates closer tolerances. In hammer forging a lot of the work is absorbed by the machinery; when in press forging, the greater percentage of work is used in the work piece. Another advantage is that the operation can be used to create any size part because there is no limit to the size of the press forging machine. New press forging techniques have been able to create a higher degree of mechanical and orientation integrity. By the constraint of oxidation to the outer layers of the part, reduced levels of microcracking occur in the finished part.
Press forging can be used to perform all types of forging, including open-die and impression-die forging. Impression-die press forging usually requires less draft than drop forging and has better dimensional accuracy. Also, press forgings can often be done in one closing of the dies, allowing for easy automation.
Upset forging
Upset forging increases the diameter of the workpiece by compressing its length. Based on number of pieces produced, this is the most widely used forging process. A few examples of common parts produced using the upset forging process are engine valves, couplings, bolts, screws, and other fasteners.
Upset forging is usually done in special high-speed machines called crank presses. The machines are usually set up to work in the horizontal plane, to facilitate the quick exchange of workpieces from one station to the next, but upsetting can also be done in a vertical crank press or a hydraulic press. The initial workpiece is usually wire or rod, but some machines can accept bars up to 25 cm (9.8 in) in diameter and a capacity of over 1000 tons. The standard upsetting machine employs split dies that contain multiple cavities. The dies open enough to allow the workpiece to move from one cavity to the next; the dies then close and the heading tool, or ram, then moves longitudinally against the bar, upsetting it into the cavity. If all of the cavities are utilized on every cycle, then a finished part will be produced with every cycle, which makes this process advantageous for mass production.
These rules must be followed when designing parts to be upset forged:
The length of unsupported metal that can be upset in one blow without injurious buckling should be limited to three times the diameter of the bar.
Lengths of stock greater than three times the diameter may be upset successfully, provided that the diameter of the upset is not more than 1.5 times the diameter of the stock.
In an upset requiring stock length greater than three times the diameter of the stock, and where the diameter of the cavity is not more than 1.5 times the diameter of the stock, the length of unsupported metal beyond the face of the die must not exceed the diameter of the bar.
Automatic hot forging
The automatic hot forging process involves feeding mill-length steel bars (typically 7 m (23 ft) long) into one end of the machine at room temperature and hot forged products emerge from the other end. This all occurs rapidly; small parts can be made at a rate of 180 parts per minute (ppm) and larger can be made at a rate of 90 ppm. The parts can be solid or hollow, round or symmetrical, up to 6 kg (13 lb), and up to 18 cm (7.1 in) in diameter. The main advantages to this process are its high output rate and ability to accept low-cost materials. Little labor is required to operate the machinery.
There is no flash produced so material savings are between 20 and 30% over conventional forging. The final product is a consistent 1,050 °C (1,920 °F) so air cooling will result in a part that is still easily machinable (the advantage being the lack of annealing required after forging). Tolerances are usually ±0.3 mm (0.012 in), surfaces are clean, and draft angles are 0.5 to 1°. Tool life is nearly double that of conventional forging because contact times are on the order of 0.06-second. The downside is that this process is only feasible on smaller symmetric parts and cost; the initial investment can be over $10 million, so large quantities are required to justify this process.
The process starts by heating the bar to 1,200 to 1,300 °C (2,190 to 2,370 °F) in less than 60 seconds using high-power induction coils. It is then descaled with rollers, sheared into blanks, and transferred through several successive forming stages, during which it is upset, preformed, final forged, and pierced (if necessary). This process can also be coupled with high-speed cold-forming operations. Generally, the cold forming operation will do the finishing stage so that the advantages of cold-working can be obtained, while maintaining the high speed of automatic hot forging.
Examples of parts made by this process are: wheel hub unit bearings, transmission gears, tapered roller bearing races, stainless steel coupling flanges, and neck rings for liquid propane (LP) gas cylinders. Manual transmission gears are an example of automatic hot forging used in conjunction with cold working.
Roll forging
Roll forging is a process where round or flat bar stock is reduced in thickness and increased in length. Roll forging is performed using two cylindrical or semi-cylindrical rolls, each containing one or more shaped grooves. A heated bar is inserted into the rolls and when it hits a spot the rolls rotate and the bar is progressively shaped as it is rolled through the machine. The piece is then transferred to the next set of grooves or turned around and reinserted into the same grooves. This continues until the desired shape and size is achieved. The advantage of this process is there is no flash and it imparts a favorable grain structure into the workpiece.
Examples of products produced using this method include axles, tapered levers and leaf springs.
Net-shape and near-net-shape forging
Also known as precision forging, it was developed to minimize cost and waste post-forging such that the resultant product needs little or no final machining. Costs are reduced by using less material, producing less scrap, less energy used, and less or no additional machining. Precision forging also requires less draft, 1° to 0°. The downside of this process is cost, it is only implemented when significant cost reduction can be achieved.
Cold forging
Near net shape forging is most common when parts are forged without heating the slug, bar or billet. Aluminum is a common material that can be cold forged depending on final shape. Lubrication of the parts being formed is critical to increase the life of the mating dies.
Induction forging
Unlike the above processes, induction forging is based on the type of heating style used. Many of the above processes can be used in conjunction with this heating method.
Multidirectional forging
Multidirectional forging is forming of a work piece in a single step in several directions. The multidirectional forming takes place through constructive measures of the tool. The vertical movement of the press ram is redirected using wedges which distributes and redirects the force of the forging press in horizontal directions.
Isothermal forging
Isothermal forging is a process by which the materials and the die are heated to the same temperature (iso- meaning "equal"). Adiabatic heating is used to assist in the deformation of the material, meaning the strain rates are highly controlled. This technique is commonly used for forging aluminium, which has a lower forging temperature than steels. Forging temperatures for aluminum are around 430 °C (806 °F), while steels and super alloys can be 930 to 1,260 °C (1,710 to 2,300 °F).
Benefits:
Near net shapes which lead to lower machining requirements and therefore lower scrap rates
Reproducibility of the part
Due to the lower heat loss smaller machines can be used to make the forging
Disadvantages:
Higher die material costs to handle temperatures and pressures
Uniform heating systems are required
Protective atmospheres or vacuum to reduce oxidation of the dies and material
Low production rates
Materials and applications
Forging of steel
Depending on the forming temperature steel forging can be divided into:
Hot forging of steel
Forging temperatures above the recrystallization temperature between 950–1250 °C
Good formability
Low forming forces
Constant tensile strength of the workpieces
Warm forging of steel
Forging temperatures between 750–950 °C
Less or no scaling at the workpiece surface
Narrower tolerances achievable than in hot forging
Limited formability and higher forming forces than for hot forging
Lower forming forces than in cold forming
Cold forging of steel
Forging temperatures at room conditions, self-heating up to 150 °C due to the forming energy
Narrowest tolerances achievable
No scaling at workpiece surface
Increase of strength and decrease of ductility due to strain hardening
Low formability and high forming forces are necessary
For industrial processes steel alloys are primarily forged in hot condition. Brass, bronze, copper, precious metals and their alloys are manufactured by cold forging processes; each metal requires a different forging temperature.
Forging of aluminium
Aluminium forging is performed at a temperature range between 350–550 °C
Forging temperatures above 550 °C are too close to the solidus temperature of the alloys and lead in conjunction with varying effective strains to unfavorable workpiece surfaces and potentially to a partial melting as well as fold formation.
Forging temperatures below 350 °C reduce formability by increasing the yield stress, which can lead to unfilled dies, cracking at the workpiece surface and increased die forces
Due to the narrow temperature range and high thermal conductivity, aluminium forging can only be realized in a particular process window. To provide good forming conditions a homogeneous temperature distribution in the entire workpiece is necessary. Therefore, the control of the tool temperature has a major influence to the process. For example, by optimizing the preform geometries the local effective strains can be influenced to reduce local overheating for a more homogeneous temperature distribution.
Application of aluminium forged parts
High-strength aluminium alloys have the tensile strength of medium strong steel alloys while providing significant weight advantages. Therefore, aluminium forged parts are mainly used in aerospace, automotive industry and many other fields of engineering especially in those fields, where highest safety standards against failure by abuse, by shock or vibratory stresses are needed. Such parts are for example pistons, chassis parts, steering components and brake parts. Commonly used alloys are AlSi1MgMn (EN AW-6082) and AlZnMgCu1,5 (EN AW-7075). About 80% of all aluminium forged parts are made of AlSi1MgMn. The high-strength alloy AlZnMgCu1,5 is mainly used for aerospace applications.
Forging of magnesium
Magnesium forging occurs at a temperature range between 290–450 °C
Magnesium alloys are more difficult to forge due to their low plasticity, low sensitivity to strain rates and narrow forming temperature. Using semi-open die hot forging with a three-slide forging press (TSFP) has become a newly developed forging method for Mg–Al alloy AZ31, commonly used in forming aircraft brackets. This forging method has shown to improve tensile properties but lacks uniform grain size. Even though the application of magnesium alloys increases by 15–20% each year in the aerospace and automotive industry, forging magnesium alloys with specialized dies is expensive and an unfeasible method to produce parts for a mass market. Instead, most magnesium alloy parts for industry are produced by casting methods.
Equipment
The most common type of forging equipment is the hammer and anvil. Principles behind the hammer and anvil are still used today in drop-hammer equipment. The principle behind the machine is simple: raise the hammer and drop it or propel it into the workpiece, which rests on the anvil. The main variations between drop-hammers are in the way the hammer is powered; the most common being air and steam hammers. Drop-hammers usually operate in a vertical position. The main reason for this is excess energy (energy that is not used to deform the workpiece) that is not released as heat or sound needs to be transmitted to the foundation. Moreover, a large machine base is needed to absorb the impacts.
To overcome some shortcomings of the drop-hammer, the counterblow machine or impactor is used. In a counterblow machine both the hammer and anvil move and the workpiece is held between them. Here excess energy becomes recoil. This allows the machine to work horizontally and have a smaller base. Other advantages include less noise, heat and vibration. It also produces a distinctly different flow pattern. Both of these machines can be used for open-die or closed-die forging.
Forging presses
A forging press, often just called a press, is used for press forging. There are two main types: mechanical and hydraulic presses. Mechanical presses function by using cams, cranks and/or toggles to produce a preset (a predetermined force at a certain location in the stroke) and reproducible stroke. Due to the nature of this type of system, different forces are available at different stroke positions. Mechanical presses are faster than their hydraulic counterparts (up to 50 strokes per minute). Their capacities range from 3 to 160 MN (300 to 18,000 short tons-force). Hydraulic presses, such as the four-die device, use fluid pressure and a piston to generate force. The advantages of a hydraulic press over a mechanical press are its flexibility and greater capacity. The disadvantages include a slower, larger, and costlier machine to operate.
The roll forging, upsetting, and automatic hot forging processes all use specialized machinery.

Fusain is a fossilised carbon deposit which, after some controversy, has been identified as fossilised charcoal.
It is fibrous, black and opaque, and often preserves details of cell wall architecture. Wood-derived fusain usually takes the form of cubic blocks, whereas fusain from other plant material may take the form of thin films which are only visible under a microscope where the surrounding rock is dissolved by acid maceration. The material is silky and crumbles on the touch.
The loss of volatile elements during combustion means that fusain fossils are usually smaller than the original organism, but this same factor makes them unlikely to be eaten by any animals (for they have no nutritional value), enhancing their preservation potential.
Fusain shows characteristics diagnostic of pyrolysis in modern material: the cell walls of xylem are homogenized, and subsequently crack along their middles.

The Future Minerals Forum is an international annual forum focused on the minerals and mining industry based in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. It was founded on 21 October 2021 by the Saudi ministry of industry and mineral resources.
History
The first summit was held from 11 to 13 January 2022 in the King Abdulaziz Conference Center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
The 3rd summit took place from 9 to 11 January 2024. During its first day, the forum witnessed the signing of deals worth $7.2 billion. In the summit, Saudi Arabia's 2016 estimates of the $1.3 trillion of untapped minerals reserves in Saudi Arabia has seen a jump by around 90% to $2.5 trillion. In addition, Bandar Al-Khorayef, the Saudi minister of industry in mineral resources announced a $182 million in exploration incentives and the issuing of 33 mining licenses.

A geofact (a portmanteau of geology and artifact) is a natural stone formation that is difficult to distinguish from a man-made artifact. Geofacts could be fluvially reworked and be misinterpreted as an artifact, especially when compared to Paleolithic artifacts.
Possible examples include several purported prominent ancient artifacts, such as the Venus of Berekhat Ram and the Venus of Tan-Tan. These are thought by many in the archaeological community to be geofacts. A site which shows an abundance of what are likely geofacts is the Gulf of Cambay.
Geofacts can be distinguished from lithic debitage, through experiments and comparisons. Separating geofacts from artifacts is a challenge that archaeologists can face while excavating a site.
Origins
Hans-Peter Schulz describes geofacts as being multi-shaped rocks that can be found while archaeologists are trying to find true artifacts during past glacial periods. Glacial periods such as the Eemian interglacial and the Middle Weichselian glaciation located in the northern parts of the world melted and began to move rocks from their original areas while they scraped everything around them. The rock movement created sometimes weapon like spears from smaller rocks and appear as artifacts but instead are just a product of glacial melting. Another element Schulz explained is the mixing of natural and salt water during the glaciations, which changed sediment locations within rocks such as the Susiluola cave located in Finland. Once the ice melted the sediment and ice created some artificial markings on pebble sized rocks. Some elements that could morph rock shapes in caves include sandstone, siltstone and quartzite creating a kinetic process of shaping the rocks. There are measurements Schulz created to distinguish a geofact such as blow angles from a sandstone or quartzite rock with a limit between 45 and 90 degrees, and if the abrasions were rounded these are considered geofacts.
Archeological errors
Artifacts are interpreted as geofacts so often that they have entire articles filled with correcting excavations. Archeological geologist Paul V. Henrich (2002) corrects journalist Graham Hancock in article, “Artifacts or Geofacts? Alternative Interpretations of Items from the Gulf of Cambay” of his alleged artifacts found in the Gulf of Cambay, India is geofacts. Henrich illustrates in pictures that these designed artifacts were a combination of cement, layered coarse and fine laminated sand stacked tightly together from lamented lake silts with enough porosity appearing rigid to look like a human design. Other corrections Henrich made were Hancock's “Cambay pendants” large flat rock objects with a hole in between assumed as jewelry but are naturally formed holes created by marine organisms. Henrich claims during excavations the team should have a geologist on site because they are experts in rock formations to help distinguish between an artifact and geofact.
Artifacts mixed with human remains can certainly contain mixtures of geofacts. In the article, “The alleged Early Paleolithic artefacts are in reality geofacts: a revision of the site of Konczyce Weilkie 4 in the Moravian Gate, South Poland,” Wiśniewski et al. (2014), explain when geofacts are mixed with artifacts in a fluvial gravel pit it becomes very difficult to distinguish between the two. Another issue Wisniewski questioned is if the site was livable during the Paleolithic period because artifacts are mobile and therefore would not be found in situ however, rocks that are native to the area would usually be a geofact. A helpful hint to decide if an item is an artifact or geofact is if there are multiple rocks that have similar edges and shapes and this type of rock is in its natural environment then it is most likely a geofact. An argument the previous excavators claimed was that some rocks were found over 140 meters from their original environment meaning they could have been artifacts moved by humans. However this was quickly refuted because evidence in glacial moraines and fluvial-glacial deposits caused many rocks to move a similar distance from their original environment.

Geometallurgy relates to the practice of combining geological understanding with metallurgical test work and / or real time processing plant data (for extractive metallurgy), to create a geological based three-dimensional predictive model of mineral processing response. It is used in the hard rock mining industry for risk management and mitigation during mineral processing plant design. It is also used for production mine planning to optimize the ore feed to the processing plant.
There are four important components or steps to developing a geometallurgical program,:
the geologically informed selection of a number of ore samples
laboratory-scale test work to determine the ore's response to mineral processing unit operations
the distribution of these parameters throughout the orebody using an accepted geostatistical technique
the application of a mining sequence plan and mineral processing models to generate a prediction of the process plant behavior
Sample selection
The sample mass and size distribution requirements are dictated by the kind of mathematical model that will be used to simulate the process plant, and the test work required to provide the appropriate model parameters. Flotation testing usually requires several kg of sample and grinding/hardness testing can required between 2 and 300 kg.
The sample selection procedure is performed to optimize granularity, sample support, and cost. Samples are usually core samples composited over the height of the mining bench. For hardness parameters, the variogram often increases rapidly near the origin and can reach the sill at distances significantly smaller than the typical drill hole collar spacing. For this reason the incremental model precision due to additional test work is often simply a consequence of the central limit theorem, and secondary correlations are sought to increase the precision without incurring additional sampling and testing costs. These secondary correlations can involve multi-variable regression analysis with other, non-metallurgical, ore parameters and/or domaining by rock type, lithology, alteration, mineralogy, or structural domains.
Test work
Geometallurgical test work is broken into those that impact comminution and those that impact recovery of the valuable component.
Comminution test work
The following tests are commonly used to generate inputs for geometallurgical modelling of comminution parameters, that is crushing, grinding and their associated energy use:
Bond ball mill work index test
Modified or comparative Bond ball mill index
Bond rod mill work index and Bond low energy impact crushing work index
SAGDesign test
SMC test
JK drop-weight test
Point load index test
SAG Power Index test (SPI(R))
MFT test
FKT, SKT, and SKT-WS tests
Geopyörä breakage test
Geostatistics
Block kriging is the most common geostatistical method used for interpolating metallurgical index parameters and it is often applied on a domain basis. Classical geostatistics require that the estimation variable be additive, and there is currently some debate on the additive nature of the metallurgical index parameters measured by the above tests. The Bond ball mill work index test is thought to be additive because of its units of energy; nevertheless, experimental blending results show a non-additive behavior. The SPI(R) value is known not to be an additive parameter, however errors introduced by block kriging are not thought to be significant . These issues, among others, are being investigated as part of the Amira P843 research program on Geometallurgical mapping and mine modelling.
Mine plan and process models
The following process models are commonly applied to geometallurgy:
The Bond equation
The SPI calibration equation, CEET
FLEET*
SMC model
Aminpro-Grind, Aminpro-Flot models

A gigantolith is a large stone or flint tool of the Heavy Neolithic industry, associated primarily with the Qaraoun culture in the Beqaa Valley, Lebanon, dating to the Epipaleolithic or early Pre-Pottery Neolithic at the end of the Stone Age. James Mellaart suggested that gigantoliths dated to a period before the Pottery Neolithic at Byblos (10,600 to 6900 BCE according to the ASPRO chronology) and noted "Aceramic cultures have not yet been found in excavations but they must have existed here as it is clear from Ras Shamra and from the fact that the Pre-Pottery B complex of Palestine originated in this area, just as the following Pottery Neolithic cultures can be traced back to the Lebanon."

Girdling, also called ring-barking, is the circumferential removal or injury of the bark (consisting of the periderm, phloem, vascular cambium and sometimes also the xylem) of a branch or trunk of a woody plant. Girdling prevents the tree from sending nutrients from its foliage to its roots, resulting in the death of the tree over time, and it can also prevent flow of nutrients in the other direction depending on how much of the xylem is removed. A branch completely girdled will fail; and, when the main trunk of a tree is girdled, the entire tree will die if it cannot regrow from above to bridge the wound. Human practices of girdling include forestry, horticulture, and vandalism. Foresters use the practice of girdling to thin forests. Extensive cankers caused by certain fungi, bacteria or viruses can girdle a trunk or limb. Animals such as rodents will girdle trees by feeding on outer bark, often during winter under snow. Girdling can also be caused by herbivorous mammals feeding on plant bark and by birds and insects, both of which can effectively girdle a tree by boring rows of adjacent holes.
Orchardists use girdling as a cultural technique to yield larger fruit or to set fruit. In viticulture (grape cultivation), the technique is also called "cincturing".
Forestry
Like all vascular plants, trees use two vascular tissues for transportation of water and nutrients: the xylem (also known as the wood) and the phloem (the innermost layer of the bark). Girdling results in the removal of the phloem, and death occurs from the inability of the leaves to transport sugars (primarily sucrose) to the roots. In this process, the xylem is left untouched, and the tree can usually still temporarily transport water and minerals from the roots to the leaves. Trees normally sprout shoots below the wound; if not, the roots die. Death occurs when the roots can no longer produce ATP and transport nutrients upwards through the xylem. The formation of new shoots below the wound can be prevented by painting the wound with herbicide.
Girdling is a slow process compared to felling and is often used only when necessary, such as in the removal of an individual tree from an ecologically protected area without damaging surrounding growth. An example is the girdling of selected Douglas-fir trees in some Northern California oak woodlands, such as Annadel State Park, in order to prevent that Douglas-fir from massive invasion of the mixed oak woodland. Girdling can be used to create standing dead wood, or snags. This can provide a valuable habitat for a variety of wildlife, including insects and nesting birds.
Accidental girdling is also possible and some activities must be performed with care. Saplings which are tied to a supporting stake may unintentionally be girdled as they grow, due to friction caused by contact with the tie. If ropes are tied frequently to a tree (e.g. to tether an animal or moor a boat), the friction of the rope can also lead to the removal of bark.
Horticulture
Girdling is also used as a technique to force a fruit-bearing plant to bear larger fruit. A farmer would place a girdle (bark removal) at base of a large branch or at the trunk. Thus, all sugars manufactured by the leaves have no sinks but the fruit, which grows to above the normal size. For grapes girdling or cincturing is used to make the grapes large and sweeter on the grape canopy and are sold as girdled grapes. Flowering and fruit setting is a problem on some trees; girdling may improve yield in the same way. The "damage" done by girdling restricts the movement of nutrients to the roots, thus the carbohydrates produced in the leaves do not go to the roots for storage. Girdling temporarily stops tree growth and thus can serve as a form of pruning. Root pruning, an ancient Asian practice, and other controlled damaging, such as driving nails into the trunk or beating the branches and trunk, produce results that are similar to girdling. Girdling is commonly used on grape, avocado, apple, litchi, mango, citrus and other trees. Girdling is normally only done to healthy trees that did not yield well the previous year. Care must be used not to damage sapwood that may kill the tree or vine. Trees normally heal in four to five weeks after cincturing. Painting the cut can protect against fungus and pests.
By other organisms
In North America, trees are prone to damage by voles in particular girdling both their roots and trunk. Among North American birds, the sapsuckers are the most common girdlers of trees. While sapsuckers will bore holes in tree trunks to feed upon insects, they also make parallel rings of holes in order to eat sap that collects in the openings or to feed it to their young. They most frequently attack pine, birch, maple, spruce and fruit trees and do the most damage during breeding season and territory establishment between February and June.
Beavers girdle the bases of stems 3-6 inches in diameter, and girdle the roots of larger trees. This often weakens or kills trees.
In the United Kingdom and other parts of Europe, the eastern grey squirrel is also known to girdle or entirely strip bark from trees.
Bucks (male deer) inadvertently girdle trees by rubbing their antlers on trees of various ages.
The beetle agrilus biguttatus can girdle trees through their feeding behavior and create zigzag galleries that measure up to 1.5 meters in length. Girdling is also the effect of the emerald ash borer, a similar debarking beetle that has killed tens of millions of ash trees in the United States.
One of several ways rabbits damage the environment in Australia is by girdling.
Trees can be girdled by climbing, twining, and ground-creeping (rampant) vines. There are several invasive species that harm trees in this way and cause significant damage to forest canopy and the health of ecosystems dependent on it. Oriental Bittersweet, Oriental Wisteria, and English Ivy all can damage and kill trees by girdling.

Goethite (, US also ) is a mineral of the diaspore group, consisting of iron(III) oxide-hydroxide, specifically the α-polymorph. It is found in soil and other low-temperature environments such as sediment. Goethite has been well known since ancient times for its use as a pigment (brown ochre). Evidence has been found of its use in paint pigment samples taken from the caves of Lascaux in France. It was first described in 1806 based on samples found in the Hollertszug Mine in Herdorf, Germany. The mineral was named after the German polymath and poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832).
Composition
Goethite is an iron oxyhydroxide containing ferric iron. It is the main component of rust and bog iron ore. Goethite's hardness ranges from 5.0 to 5.5 on the Mohs Scale, and its specific gravity varies from 3.3 to 4.3. The mineral forms prismatic needle-like crystals ("needle ironstone") but is more typically massive.
Feroxyhyte and lepidocrocite are both polymorphs of the iron oxyhydroxide FeO(OH) which are stable at the pressure and temperature conditions of the Earth's surface. Although they have the same chemical formula as goethite, their different crystalline structures make them distinct minerals.
Additionally, goethite has several high-pressure and high-temperature polymorphs, which may be relevant to the conditions of the Earth's interior. These include ε-FeOOH, which has an orthorhombic crystal structure, a cubic pyrite-type polymorph with or without losing hydrogen and an ultradense hexagonal structure.
Goethite has the same crystal structure as diaspore, the analogous aluminium oxide-hydroxide mineral. Oxygen and hydroxide ions form a hexagonal close-packed structure, with iron ions filling octahedral sites between the anions. The sites filled by iron ions form paired chains running the length of the crystal, with the two chains in each pair joined by hydroxide ions.
Formation
Goethite often forms through the weathering of other iron-rich minerals, and thus is a common component of soils, concentrated in laterite soils. Nanoparticulate authigenic goethite is a common diagenetic iron oxyhydroxide in both marine and lake sediments. The formation of goethite is marked by the oxidation state change of Fe2+ (ferrous) to Fe3+ (ferric), which allows for goethite to exist at surface conditions. Because of this oxidation state change, goethite is commonly seen as a pseudomorph. As iron-bearing minerals are brought to the zone of oxidation within the soil, the iron turns from iron(II) to iron(III), while the original shape of the parent mineral is retained. Common goethite pseudomorphs include pyrite, siderite, and marcasite, though any iron(II)-bearing mineral could become a goethite pseudomorph if proper conditions are met. It may also be precipitated by groundwater or in other sedimentary conditions, or form as a primary mineral in hydrothermal deposits. Goethite has also been found to be produced by the excretion processes of certain bacteria types.
Distribution
Goethite is found all over the planet, usually in the form of concretions, stalactitic formations, oolites (a form consisting of tiny round grains cemented together), reniform (kidney shapes) or botryoidal (globular, like bunches of grapes) accumulations. It is also a very common pseudomorph. It is frequently encountered in the swampy areas at the head of spring waters ('bog iron'), on cave floors, and on the bottom of lakes and small creeks. The boxworks or gossan resulting from the oxidation of sulfide ore deposits is formed of goethite along with other iron oxides and quartz.
Significant deposits of goethite are found in England; Cuba; and Minnesota, Missouri, Colorado, Alabama, Georgia, Virginia, and Tennessee, in the United States.
Deposits significant in location, if not in abundance, have been found in the Martian crater Gusev by NASA's Spirit rover, providing strong evidence for the presence of liquid water on the planet in an earlier stage of its evolution.
Limpets' teeth are composed of about 80% goethite fibres of only tens of nanometers in diameter, small enough to be flaw-insensitive, which accounts for their extreme tensile strength of 3.5–6.0 GPa and elastic modulus of 120±30 GPa.
Usage
Its main modern use is as an iron ore, being referred to as brown iron ore. Goethite is an important component of ochre pigments, and has been heat-treated for use as a red pigment since Paleolithic times. Iron-rich lateritic soils that have developed over serpentinite rocks in tropical climates are mined for their iron content, as well as other metals.
Fine goethite specimens are rare and therefore are valued collectibles. Banded or iridescent varieties are cut and polished into cabochons for jewelry making.
In a royal tomb of the ancient kingdom of Phrygia, a body was found believed to be King Gordias, father of the legendary King Midas. The burial shroud had been colored with a dye containing goethite, which in its original un-faded state would have made the shroud look as though it were woven from gold. Historians speculate that the legend of King Midas' golden touch might have originated from Phrygian royalty wearing clothes made from such golden-colored textiles.
Gallery

Golden ochre, less often Gold Ochre (French: Ocre d’or, German: Gold Ocker от Ancient Greek: ὠχρός yellow-pale, orange or french ochre (obsolete)) — one of the most famous and brightly colored varieties of ochre — is a natural or (rarely) artificial pigment. In terms of mineral composition, golden ochre is clay with an admixture of aluminosilicates and a high content of the yellow dye itself, iron hydroxide, most often in the form of brown iron ore or limonite. The exact composition of ochre and its impurities vary greatly depending on the place of origin.
Golden ochre is one of the oldest paints, known as a painting material since the times of cave paintings. In wall painting it is one of the main yellow pigments. Golden ochre has good density, the same covering power, high light fastness, pure color and soft structure. To this day it is used in all painting techniques without exception.
Description and properties
The golden ochre pigment is a natural mixture that consists primarily of crystalline iron oxide hydrate with some clay. The closest to golden ochre among related minerals is light ochre, which has a less warm and rich color. If in light ochre the content of the main dye, iron oxide hydrate, is quite low and ranges from 12 to 25%, then in golden ochre its amount can reach 70-75%. As a result, light ochre has a yellow color of a cooler tone and weaker color saturation and is considered a paint that is not bright and not intense. Golden ochre differs from it in its earthy tint and warmer tone.
Yellow ochres are more common in nature than others due to the abundance of their constituent minerals. When heated, orange and yellow ochre release water and gradually darken, acquiring an increasingly reddish tint. This occurs due to the transformation of iron hydroxide into a dark red anhydrous oxide (iron ochre). With controlled calcination of yellow ochre, almost the entire range of shades can be obtained from yellow and orange to red or brown.
Among other varieties of ochres, it was golden ochre that was valued above others; it was classified as the highest category of pigments in this category. In the 18th-19th centuries, golden ochre was supplied to the rest of Europe and Russia from the province of Rousillon, as a result of which the second name of this paint for a long time was French ochre. Of the total number of ochres, it is the golden ochre pigment that is closer in purity, brightness and shade all to Attic ochre, the most highly valued yellow paint of Ancient Greece and Rome.
Until the mid-20th century, picturesque yellow ochres were traditionally divided into fawn, yellow, saffron yellow, golden and orange. In the modern artist's palette, four types of nominal yellow ochre are most often encountered: light, medium, golden and dark. Natural and Italian sienna can also be considered among the same paints. In terms of composition, golden ochre should include at least 53% Fe2O3, 5% Al2O3 and 34% SiO2 with the complete absence of impurities such as CaO, MgO, MnO2 and insoluble sulfates. For comparison: of all yellow ochres, only dark ochre contains more iron oxide (more than 60%).
History and use
Golden ochre is best known as a mineral pigment common in nature, primarily for artistic paints. It has been found since ancient times in rock paintings, frescoes of Ancient Egypt, Greece and Rome. This pigment was also constantly used when painting temples and in icon painting. When analyzing the colorful composition of the icons of Theophan the Greek, despite all the restraint of his color scheme, golden ochre was clearly established.
Golden ochre is also used in the production and restoration of expensive types of furniture. For example, when oil gilding on levkas (gesso), several layers of golden ochre are first applied in oil, and then, after drying and grinding, they are coated with oil gulfarbene varnish. As a result, the surface for gilding is perfectly matte and retains the color of the foil. Gilding on carvings looks especially impressive if shiny polished areas alternate with matte ones.
As an artist's paint, golden ochre has traditionally been a staple in artists palettes, primarily in oil painting, but also in tempera (including watercolor) and more recently, acrylic. It is stable both in pure form and in mixtures. However, when writing with tempera or watercolor, it is necessary to take into account one feature of ochre, dictated by its mineral nature: with a large amount of water-soluble film former, there is a risk of pigment precipitation (both alumina and iron hydroxide), so it is recommended to use ochre in the form of a thick paste.
The muted, slightly "earthy" shade of golden ochre makes it possible to achieve a soft and warm color palette of the painting and, in mixtures with brighter paints, to slightly "reduce" their color activity. There is one more feature. It is generally recommended to avoid very large, raised strokes with pure ochre, since due to the slow and incomplete drying of the layers to the full depth, uneven color and irregular matte surface may appear. The disadvantages of golden ochre include its vulnerability in case of close friction with metal (for example, in the case of rubbing with a palette knife). After some time, such contact can cause the ochre to turn green.
Often light ochre or golden ochre is used to give the painting the impression of external monochrome or unity of color, and also to ensure that the light in the painting does not look colder than the shadow. In this case, ochre performs not only the function of enhancing the feeling of unity of the picture, but also an additional "warming" color.
Golden ochre has been known and widely used as a stable, reliable and inexpensive pigment for any finishing, household and decorative purposes, suitable for painting both interior and exterior work. It does not fade and can withstand almost any weather conditions. A description of a similar use of golden ochre can be found in one of the stories of the Russian writer Sergeev-Tsensky: «...The hives were squat, wide, on four oak logs each, with pitched roofs, covered here with iron, here with plywood, but uniformly painted with golden ochre, cheerful in appearance».
Along with other types of ochre, golden ochre is traditionally widely used in tinting and painting ceramics.

Granby Consolidated Mining, Smelting and Power Co. was established by charter to operate in the Boundary region of southern British Columbia. Primarily involved in the mining and smelting of copper, the conglomerate became a publicly traded company. The various corporate operating names within the former group mostly specified the Granby identity.
Formation
In 1891, Henry White and Matthew Hotter staked the Knob Hill and Old Ironsides claims respectively on what became known as Phoenix Mountain. In need of development capital, the two mines were incorporated as separate companies. In 1895, Jay Paul Graves, a Spokane-based financier, agreed to promote the venture for a quarter interest. He also purchased the adjoining Victoria and Fourth of July claims. When seeking venture capital in Montreal, Graves connected with S.H.C. Miner, president of the Quebec-based Granby Rubber Company and a director of the Eastern Townships Bank.
In 1897, the two companies were incorporated in Quebec, with White and Hotter exiting the following year. In 1899, Graves and Miner formed the Granby Consolidated Mining & Smelting Co., which bought the Fourth of July, Victoria, Aetna, and Phoenix claims. The pair jointly owned the Old Ironsides, the Knob Hill, and other Boundary properties. The Granby Consolidated directors were dubbed the Miner-Graves syndicate. The syndicate established the upper townsite at Phoenix. Ore had been stockpiled at the mines awaiting the arrival of the Canadian Pacific Railway (CP) line in May 1900. That July, the first trainload descended to the Granby smelter at Grand Forks, which commenced processing in August. Hydroelectricity plants on the Granby River (company one) and at Bonnington Falls supplied power.
In May 1901, a new BC charter, with wider powers, created the Granby Consolidated Mining, Smelting & Power Co., which absorbed the existing Granby Consolidated, Old Ironsides, Knob Hill, and other syndicate properties, while dissolving the syndicate.
Operation
In 1901, the addition of two more furnaces increased daily capacity to 1,500 tons.
By that time, the underground mining had changed to the room and pillar method to create stopes which avoided the extensive timbering associated with the square set method. In 1903, three small steam shovels worked surface operations producing half the mine's production, being one of the earliest attempts at open-pit mining in BC. Mine acquisitions and improvements included the Granby car, two giant steam shovels, two saddle tank steam locomotives, and bunkers and loading facilities for the Great Northern Railway (GN) line, which arrived in 1905. Gentler grades allowed heavier trains. Augmented by rate cutting, GN quickly replaced CP in hauling most of the mountain's ore. The blister copper produced by the smelter went to the Nichols Chemical Company in Brooklyn, New York for further refining.
In 1902, Miner divested his Granby interests. Graves in liaison with GN's James J. Hill sought control, but William H. Nichols acquired a majority interest in 1904. By 1906, the Knob Hill and the Old Ironsides workings joined underground to become a huge single network called the Granby mine, which spread into the Victoria claim that year. By 1908, Granby Consolidated owned 35 claims on the mountain, and smelter processing peaked at 1,178,853 tons, including ore from more distant mines. A narrow gauge railway moved ore throughout the smelter. On the mountain, the Curlew and the Gold Drop mines were acquired in 1909 and the Snowshoe in 1913. Augmented infrastructure increased daily capacity to 3,400 tons, creating the largest copper smelter in the British Empire and second largest in the world.
High copper prices during World War I prolonged the Phoenix operations. Mining ended in June 1919. By year end, the mine equipment was removed, the portals dynamited, and the railway tracks lifted.
Map
"Phoenix mines map". geography.ua.edu. 1911.
Granby mine reactivated
In 1936, W.E. McArthur leased the mine, extracting from the old workings. After buying the property, he operated intermittently until 1946. Repurchased by the Granby company in 1955, open-pit mining began in 1959. Erecting a concentrator, Granby mined until 1976. Ore trucked across the border prolonged the plant operations a further two years.
Other locations
At Anyox, Granby Consolidated operated a mine and smelter 1914–1936.
The Granby coalmine at Cassidy operated 1918–1932.
At a 1923 foreclosure sale, Allenby Copper Co., a Granby Consolidated affiliate, acquired the Canadian Copper Corporation mine on Copper Mountain. Ore shipping began in 1925, and Granby Consolidated and Allenby Copper merged the next year. Operations closed in 1930, reopened in 1937, and finally closed in 1957.
At the Granduc Mine, the Granby Mining Co. conducted exploration in 1952, but an unrelated joint venture undertook later development and operation.
Granisle Copper Co., a Granby Mining Co. subsidiary, operated an open pit 1966–1973.
Name legacy
Granby car is an employee-designed self-dumping ore car introduced in 1905. The fleet comprised twenty 10-ton steel cars.
Granby River and Granby Provincial Park on the upper reaches.
Granisle, a former mining town on Babine Lake, derived from subsidiary Granisle Copper.
Granby Point, Granby Bay, and the Granby Peninsula, near Anyox on Observatory Inlet.
Footnotes

In archaeology, a grattoir de côté (French for side scraper) is a ridged variety of steep-scraper distinguished by a working edge on one side. They were found at various archaeological sites in Lebanon including Ain Cheikh and Jdeideh II and are suggested to date to Upper Paleolithic stages three or four (Levantine Aurignacian).

The Gray's Inn Lane Hand Axe is a pointed flint hand axe, found buried in gravel under Gray's Inn Lane, London, England, by pioneering archaeologist John Conyers in 1679, and now in the British Museum. The hand axe is a fine example from about 350,000 years ago, in the Lower Paleolithic period, but its main significance lies in the role it and the circumstances of its excavation played in the emerging understanding of early human history.
Discovery and history
John Conyers was present at the excavation in 1679 of the remains of a supposed elephant at Battlebridge in gravel; the site was near Gray's Inn Lane, opposite "Black Mary's", and the remaining tooth was later thought to be of a mammoth or straight-tusked elephant. A pointed flint hand axe was found nearby,
At the time, it was commonly thought that humans had been on Earth for a relatively short period of time, and that stone tools were used by people who simply lacked the knowledge to create metal tools.
Conyers was the first to argue that it was a human artefact. After Conyers' death, John Bagford (c. 1650–1716) published the discovery, rejecting the idea that the assemblage of elephant bones and stone axe had originated from the time of Noah's flood, arguing instead for its origin in the Roman period under the Emperor Claudius; this was in a letter of 1715, in which Bagford accepted the human origin of the handaxe. With other items from Conyers' collection, the handaxe passed to the collection of Hans Sloane, whose own collection was one of the founding collections of the British Museum.
The British Museum estimates that the hand axe is around 350,000 years old. Elephants were living in Britain at this time, during an Ice age when the climate was similar to that of today. The hand axe is currently displayed in the "Enlightenment Gallery" of the British Museum, which is housed in the King's Library.

The Green Quarry Site, designated 20OA7, is an archaeological site located near Pentwater, Michigan. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1972. The site, covering 40 acres (16 ha), is the only known source of Lambrix chert, which was used for a variety of prehistoric tools.

Grime's Graves is a large Neolithic flint mining complex in Norfolk, England. It lies 8 km (5.0 mi) north east from Brandon, Suffolk in the East of England. It was worked between c. 2600 and c. 2300 BC, although production may have continued through the Bronze and Iron Ages and later, owing to the low cost of flint compared with metals. Flint was much in demand for making polished stone axes in the Neolithic period. Much later, when flint had been replaced by metal tools, flint nodules were in demand for other uses, such as for building and as strikers for muskets.
Grime's Graves was first extensively explored by the 19th-century archaeologist William Greenwell.
The scheduled monument extends over an area of some 37 ha (91 acres) and consists of at least 433 shafts dug into the natural chalk to reach seams of flint. The largest shafts are more than 14 m (46 ft) deep and 12 m (39 ft) in diameter at the surface. It has been calculated that more than 2,000 tonnes of chalk had to be removed from the larger shafts, taking 20 men around five months, before stone of sufficient quality was reached. An upper 'topstone' and middle 'wallstone' seam of flint was dug through on the way to the deeper third 'floorstone' seam which most interested the miners. The site is managed by English Heritage and can be visited.
The site is also a biological and geological Site of Special Scientific Interest and a Geological Conservation Review site. It is part of the Breckland Special Area of Conservation and Special Protection Area.
Mining method
In order to remove the chalk efficiently, the ancient miners built wooden platforms and ladders as they dug downwards and piled the spoil around the shaft opening using turf revetments to hold it in place for the season, after which the shaft and all its galleries were thoroughly and fastidiously backfilled to promote stability. The landscape around Grime's Graves has a characteristic pockmarked appearance caused by the infilled shafts. This is probably what inspired the later Anglo-Saxon inhabitants of the area to name it after their god Grim (literally the masked, or hooded one, a euphemism for Woden). Although the pagan Anglo-Saxons seem to have had some idea of what the site was, as the name of the site means literally "the masked one's quarries" (or Grim's Graben), it was not until Canon William Greenwell excavated one of the shafts in 1868–1870 that their purpose was discovered in modern times. Similar sites have been found elsewhere in Europe, such as Cissbury in West Sussex, Krzemionki in Poland, and Spiennes in Belgium.
Tools
The miners used picks fashioned from the antler of red deer. They probably used wooden shovels, although this is only inferred by analogy with other flint mines with better conditions for the preservation of artefacts. Analysis of the antlers has shown that the miners were mainly right-handed and favoured the left antlers out of those that were naturally shed seasonally by the deer. The 28 pits excavated up to 2008 yielded an average of 142.5 antler picks each, of which an average of 14.8 have been found to be left-handed.
Once they had reached the floorstone flint, the miners dug lateral galleries outwards from the bottom, following the flint seam. The medium-depth shafts yielded as much as 60 tons of flint nodules, which were brought to the surface and roughly worked into shape on site. The blank tools were then possibly traded elsewhere for final polishing. It is estimated that 60 tons of flint could have produced as many as 10,000 of the polished stone axes, which were the mines' main product. Extrapolation across the site suggests that Grime's Graves may have produced around 16–18,000 tonnes of flint across the 433 shafts recorded to date. However, there are large areas of the site covered by later activity which are believed to conceal many more mineshafts.
There were other hard stones used for axe manufacture, those of the Langdale axe industry and Penmaenmawr in North Wales being traded across Europe, as well as other less well-known igneous and metamorphic rocks. The axes were much in demand for forest clearance and settlement, development of farmland for arable crops and raising animals, which characterises the Neolithic period.
Customs and beliefs
One unproductive shaft (pit 15) appears to have been turned into a shrine. An altar of flint lumps had been built with a chalk bowl at its base and antler picks piled around. In front of the altar had been placed a Venus figurine of chalk, a chalk phallus and some balls, also of chalk. It may have been an attempt to ensure that the mine remained productive or 'fertile' after this particular shaft turned out to have little flint in it. However, it is possible that the Venus figurine and the phallus are modern fakes – there is a lack of primary evidence surrounding their recovery in 1939, and rumours circulated at the time of the excavation that they were planted in order to deceive Leslie Armstrong, the archaeologist overseeing the dig.
Neolithic infrastructure
Such a large industry may have required supporting infrastructure. Assuming no more than two shafts were open at any one time, around 120 red deer may have needed to be bred and managed nearby, in order to provide a steady supply of antler as well as skin, food and other products that the miners would require. Alternatively, the mines may have been worked intermittently by local farmers, as happened in many early metal mines during the Bronze Age and the later Iron Age.
Earlier flint mines in Britain, such as Cissbury in West Sussex, were just as important as Grime's Graves, and there were many very local sources of flint which were exploited on the downlands. However, it is probably relevant that Grime's Graves were close to the very rich soils of the Fens, and forest clearance here would rely on local products.
There was also extensive farming settlement during the Bronze Age, known from middens that infill the mouths of many Neolithic mineshafts. Animal bones from these middens show that the Bronze Age people kept cattle, which they milked, sheep and a few pigs. They also grew barley, wheat and peas.
Modern history
Grime's Graves was first extensively explored by the archaeologist William Greenwell in 1868. The function of the holes in the ground around it was not known in the time between the mine's abandonment and his exploration of it. An 18th-century priest suggested that the holes were left by Vikings, and an amateur archeologist suggested a century later that they were the remains of a fortress of the Celts.
The site today
Grime's Graves is in the care of English Heritage. It is open to the public and it is possible to descend a 9 m (30 ft) ladder and explore one of the shafts. There is a small exhibition area. This is the only shaft of its kind open to the public in Britain.
Publications
The full English Heritage reports on the excavations at Grime's Graves in 1971–72 are now available online through the Archaeology Data Service. Doctor Philip Harding FSA, later to appear in the TV programme Time Team, dug the site each summer from 1972 to 1976.
Images

In archaeology, a grinding slab is a ground stone artifact generally used to grind plant materials into usable size, though some slabs were used to shape other ground stone artifacts. Some grinding stones are portable; others are not and, in fact, may be part of a stone outcropping.
Grinding slabs used for plant processing typically acted as a coarse surface against which plant materials were ground using a portable hand stone, or mano ("hand" in Spanish). Variant grinding slabs are referred to as metates or querns, and have a ground-out bowl. Like all ground stone artifacts, grinding slabs are made of large-grained materials such as granite, basalt, or similar tool stones.

Grinton Smelt Mill (also known as How Mill) is a ruined lead mining and processing site on Cogden Moor, south of Grinton in Swaledale, North Yorkshire, England. The site was built in its present form c. 1820 for the specific purpose of processing lead won by hushing and hydraulic mining. The buildings and stone flue are now grade II* listed structures and all are scheduled monuments. The site is recognised as being the best preserved lead mining site in the Yorkshire Dales.
A mill had existed on the site since the early 18th century, but the later addition of a 980-foot (300 m) flue allowed workers to recover waste lead from the flue.
History
Since Roman times, the Yorkshire Dales were an important source of lead. The history of lead mining in Swaledale is believed to go as far back as the 2nd century BC, however, the first written records of lead being worked in the Grinton area are in documents dated in 1219. The ownership of land in the area was split between the Manor of Healaugh and the Priory at Bridlington, but at the Dissolution, the land was sold off with the crown maintaining mineral rights over any future enterprises.
Lead worked at Grinton Smelt Mill came from the Grinton How Vein (mined at Grinton How, Whiteside and Fearnought Mines) which was just to the south of the mill site. Lead working was difficult because the ore is so heavy, therefore the smelt mills were located quite close to the occurrence of lead ore rather than a central mill fed by several mines. This led to over 30 mills in Swaledale alone. Grinton Mill was also known variously as How Mill (as it processed lead from the How Vein) and Low Mill, which is believed to stem from the fact that Grovebeck Mill some 1.2 miles (2 km) to the west, was some 330 feet (100 m) higher.
The site is 1.2 miles (2 km) south of Grinton and 5.6 miles (9 km) north west of Leyburn and situated at the confluence of Smales Gill and Cogden Gill. The first mill on the site was built c. 1727 by William Marriott, though the area was heavily mined before this time. A relative of William Marriott, Reginald Marriott, was granted a right to mine the area in 1696, something that led him into dispute with Lord Wharton. Lord Wharton, a local landowner and politician, laid claim to the land and started up his own mines less than 100 yards (91 m) from Marriott's. This led to a trial that started in 1705 and involved over 317 witnesses and was not completed until after three years of legal wrangling. The judiciary found in the favour of Marriott, and whilst Wharton threatened further legal action, the case was never heard again. It is possible that a drop in the price of lead between 1710 and 1720, meant that he had lost interest in the case. In 1720, Marriott sought an extension on the lease of the area up to 1727, but was required to pay one-eighth of his turnover to the crown. Jennings and Fieldhouse suggest that the venture must have been profitable for him to agree to this.
The London Lead Company (LLC) are believed to have purchased the site and two mines from Marriott in 1733, and installed new furnaces, though modern research has cast doubt on whether or not the LLC ever came to Swaledale and ran any operations whatsoever. During the 1730s, the production of Grinton Mill was a little over 100 tonnes (110 tons) per year, though this must be remembered as a final product out from the mill, not the tonnage that was mined.
The mill buildings that stand into the modern day, are those constructed between 1820 and 1822. Many historians believe that the long time between the old mill being decommissioned, and full production starting in the new mill, is suggestive that the entire site was completely rebuilt between 1820 and 1822. Originally the site was composed of three buildings, but only the main mill and peat store survive. The third building is annotated on mapping from the 1890s as being the Smithy. Pictures exist of the building which was demolished in the 1960s.
The main building is 53 feet (16 m) long by 36 feet (11 m) wide. Lead smelting was carried out in the main mill, with peat chutes located on the south side of the peat store to feed into the mill when necessary. The main room in the mill contained three hearths for roasting the ore, and behind this (to the north) was the bellows room (16 feet (4.9 m) x 26 feet (7.9 m). An external waterwheel was attached to the outside wall of the bellows room and this measured approximately 20 feet (6.1 m) in diameter, and 20 inches (500 mm) wide. Peat was sourced from the neighbouring moorland and brought to the site on horse and cart. The large open archways in the north wall of the peat house were to aid the drying of the peat in readiness for use in the mill next door.
The flue went eastwards up the hill over a distance of 980 feet (300 m) onto the top of the nearby Sharrow Hill at a height of 1,210 feet (370 m) above sea level. The chimney width has been estimated at 9 feet (2.7 m) on each side. Surveys indicate that the flue was 5 feet 11 inches (1.8 m) high and 5 feet 3 inches (1.6 m) wide internally. A longer flue allowed for lead to be reclaimed from waste gases expelled through it. Several access holes have been located on the flue on the south side only, where small boys were employed to scrape the toxic dust from the flue's walls.
To the immediate west of the smelt mill building was a 40-foot-long (12 m) barrel-arched watercourse which carried Cogden Beck away from the smelt mill. The watercourse was the overflow from a man-made reservoir built to the immediate south on ground higher than the mill building. The reservoir fed a "wobbly aqueduct", known as a launder, which carried water into the smelt mill at roof height, and about 10 feet (3 m) above the axle height of the wheel, which has led to a calculation of 20 feet (6.1 m) for the diameter of the waterwheel. The water then powered the waterwheel which activated the bellows and kept the furnaces supplied with air to aid the smelting of rock.
The lead mining industry in Grinton, and Swaledale, had a profound effect on the population of the dale. The graph shows the census statistics for 120 years across the 19th and early 20th century. A depression in the lead industry between 1829 and 1833, led to fall in the number of miners, but the lead industry was dwindling by this time anyway due to cheaper imports from abroad. Thereafter, the statistics are steadily dropping.
Various closure dates have been put forward for Grinton Mill; several sources suggest 1886, but some postulate that a subsidiary company (the Grinton Mining and Smelting Company) refurbished the hearths and kept them working until 1893. A report in The York Herald from 1887, states that the mine had been closed in 1886, but that a new company had secured lease of 21 years with a payment of 5% dues to the crown for the mining rights.
After the mill was abandoned for lead smelting purposes, it was used as a sheep dip and a place of protection for cattle. This necessitated a new roof to be constructed in 1987. The site is a scheduled monument and the buildings, including the barrel-arched watercourse, are listed as grade II*. The whole site is known for being the best preserved lead mining and smelting site in all of the Yorkshire Dales. A further £16,000 was spent on renovating the mill in 1998; the money came from the Yorkshire Dales National Park and an EU fund.
In July 2019, flash flooding affected Wensleydale and Swaledale, with the waters of Cogden Gill sweeping away the barrel-arched watercourse that the water flowed through. The floods also destroyed a stone bridge on the road to Grinton; this was the normal route for smelter ore to leave the site. Work was undertaken in January and February 2020 to protect the edge of the main mill building from future water damage and subsidence.

In archaeology, ground stone is a category of stone tool formed by the grinding of a coarse-grained tool stone, either purposely or incidentally. Ground stone tools are usually made of basalt, rhyolite, granite, or other cryptocrystalline and igneous stones whose coarse structure makes them ideal for grinding other materials, including plants and other stones.
Organic and inorganic materials are processed on ground stones into edible products. They are sometimes the only artefacts preserved on archaeological sites and are found worldwide.
Origin
The adoption of ground stone technology is associated closely with the Neolithic, also called the New Stone Age. The Stone Age comes from the three-age system developed by Christian Jürgensen Thomsen. In the Levant ground stones appear in Mesolithic 2 (Natufian). In prehistoric Japan, ground stone tools appear during the Japanese Paleolithic, possibly predating adoption elsewhere in the Neolithic by 25,000 years.
Creation
Ground stones were created and used for a wide variety of reasons. Each use resulted in a different development and process by which a person created their ground stone. For example, the process for creating the head of a hammer is different from the process used to create a detailed decoration piece for one’s home. That being said, some processes are basic to most ground stone making.
When choosing what type of stone to use for a ground stone tool, toughness is the most important factor. If the stone is not tough enough to withstand hard hits and instead just flakes and cracks easily, the work done to create the tool has gone to waste. A stone that will not shear, flake, or crack when tested against large impacts is the most important aspect when choosing what kind of stone to use. Examples of this kind of stone include limestone, sandstone, granite, basalt, rhyolite and other igneous and cryptocrystalline rocks.
Cryptocrystalline rocks are good to use for ground stones because they have a very fine grain structure. This is helpful because the smaller the grains are in a rock, the harder the rock is.
Holes could be ground out of stones with the use of sharp pointed stones or hardened sticks. By spinning the ground stone with one's hands and applying substantial pressure to the sharp point into the ground stone, a hole could be drilled into the stone with a large amount of time and effort. Sand would be used to help quicken the process by putting it in the partially formed hole as the sharp point was being pressed. The sand would help grind more of the stone away. To put a hole all the way through a piece of stone, it would be first drilled half way in one direction and be finished on the opposite side.
Some ground stone tools are incidental, caused by use with other tools: manos, for example, are hand stones used in conjunction with metates and other grinding slabs (querns), and develop their ground surfaces through wear. Other ground stone tools include adzes, celts, and axes, which are manufactured using a labor-intensive, time-consuming method of repeated grinding against a harder stone or with sand, often using water as a lubricant. These tools are often made using durable finer-grained materials rather than coarse materials. In the North American arctic, tools made of ground slate were used by the Norton, Dorset, and Thule tool cultures, among others. Common forms of these tools were projectile points and ulus. These tools were often purpose-made by creating a blank, either by chipping or using a technique where the slate was sawed partway through on one or both sides and then snapped into a blank, then finished by grinding with abraders or whetstones.
Uses
When making the head of an axe out of stone, the piece would be made so it could be hafted. In order to have the stone hafted onto a larger piece, like wood or bone, the ground stone may have at least two notches ground out of one side of the stone, making grooves for the hafting material to lie inside. These grooves would ensure that the stone would not move when struck with a large force. Tough hide would then be wound around the handle and inside the grooves, binding the ground stone and the handle together.
Ground stones were often used as dinnerware. Using large stones, lithic reduction would be done for long periods of time to create bowls and pots for food. Jewelry, beads, ear spools and other decorative ground stones were a sign of high status due to the time and effort needed to make pieces of such small size and detail.
When mashing up seeds and leaves into powders, rounded and smooth ground stones would be used inside a stone bowl. This pair of tools is called a mortar and pestle. The material would be placed into the mortar and the pestle would be moved and pressed into the mortar to grind the material into a fine powder. This process could be used for medicine and cooking. The mortar and pestle are still used today for many cooking recipes.
Once shaped into an active (making the action, e.g. handstones) or passive (receiving the action, e.g. slab) tool, the stone is used to process a large range of products. At the end of its life, the stone can be recycled - either reused as a ground stone, used as a construction stone, or discarded
Analytical methods
In archaeology, ground stones are studied to document past activities, agriculture strategies and the process of domestication. Ground stones technology was identified as daily life technology associated with cereals processing. However, their study has shown that they are more complex to understand and have multi-function. Ethnographic studies are essential to define the research question but are not enough to correctly determine the function of ground stones. Typology, ethnographic studies and experimental replicas help understand groundstone technologies.
Typical methods are used to analyse them: the trace of wear and the analysis of botanical residues (starch grains and phytoliths).
Use-wear analysis
This technique analyses the trace of wear left by the types of actions (pounding, grinding, cutting). The trace of wear is specific to the action but also the type of product (organic or inorganic) process. Handstones for cereals and hide processing were distinguished using this method.
Botanical remains
Starch grains and phytoliths are botanical remains which are well preserved in archaeological context and are small enough to be trapped in the micro-crevice of a ground stone. Analyzing the botanical remains is essential to precise the function of the stones.
A standardized protocol is used to study plant remains. First, there are extracts from the ground stones, using a toothbrush and an ultrasonic bath. Then, the residues are observed under a polarised microscope. And finish, starch are compared to a reference collection of experimental modern starch grains.

In archaeology, a hammerstone is a hard cobble
used to strike off lithic flakes from a lump of tool stone during the process of lithic reduction. The hammerstone is a rather universal stone tool which appeared early in most regions of the world including Europe, India and North America. This technology was of major importance to prehistoric cultures before the development of metalworking.
Materials
A hammerstone is made of a material such as sandstone, limestone or quartzite, is often ovoid in shape (to fit the human hand better), and develops telltale battering marks on one or both ends. In archaeological recovery, hammerstones are often found in association with other stone tool artifacts, debitage and/or objects of the hammer such as ore. The modern use of hammerstones is now mostly limited to flintknappers and others who wish to develop a better understanding of how stone tools were made.
Usage
Hammerstones are or were used to produce flakes and hand axes as well as more specialist tools from materials such as flint and chert. They were applied to the edges of such stones so that the impact forces caused brittle fractures, and loss of flakes for example. They were also widely used to reduce the bulk of other hard stones such as jade, jadeite and hornstone to make polished stone tools. A good example is the hornstone found in the English Lake District used to make polished axes during the early Neolithic period, and known as the Langdale axe industry.
Hammerstones were used widely in crushing mineral ores such as malachite during the Chalcolithic period, the earliest part of the Bronze Age, and cassiterite prior to smelting of tin. Iron ores would have been crushed to powder in a similar way during the Iron Age. Such crushing was needed to hasten and encourage reduction in the furnaces where charcoal was the main reducing agent.
Other examples of their use include reducing minerals like haematite to powder, for pigment, and crushing of hard nuts, such as hazel nuts, to extract the edible kernels.
Types of hammerstone
Throughout the period of time in which humans have made stone tools (not only during Prehistory), different techniques and different types of hammerstone have been used. The following are the basic types; Certain sophisticated procedures (such as the use of Conchoidal fractures) requires more specialized tools.
Direct percussion
Sleeping (passive) hammer
A large stone set in the ground or firmly mounted. The stone being worked is hit against this anvil, resulting in large flakes that are further processed into tools. This technique is not well known, though there is evidence of it being used during the Lower Paleolithic. The problem with the anvil stone is that the user handles large stones, which can be difficult to control with precision.
Another way of using the sleeping hammer as an anvil is more typical of advanced periods (from the Upper Paleolithic). Although it is based on the use of an anchored stone, the technical concept is completely different: it is about resting stone chips or sheets on the anvil and carrying out an abrupt retouching due to impact on one side (back) or extremity (truncated) thus obtaining retouched orthogonal fractures (this is what is called abrupt retouch). It is also possible to retouch stone tools on the anvil by means of pressure flaking, thus obtaining a regular and monofacial retouched edge.
Active hard hammer
A simple stone with a worked edge held directly in the hand as a hammer. The hard hammer is and has been the most used throughout human history, because although other types of hammer are used as main tools for carving, stone hammers are the tools that prepared the way for the more advanced techniques. Hard percussion is the first to appear and the only one known for at least two million years (until the soft hammer is incorporated); it was used to manufacture tools throughout the entire operational sequence until lithic technology improved. Then, the hard hammer was relegated to the first stages of making an artifact: the initial roughing, the primary workmanship (the creation of preforms, which would later be refined with a soft or pressure hammer), the attack of percussion planes inaccessible to the soft hammer, the preparation of percussion platforms in certain nuclei, etc.
Despite indirect evidence of its long persistence, archeology has revealed very few hammers. Among the oldest are those cited by Jean and Nicole Chavaillon in both Gomboré 1B, Melka Kunturé and even Olduvai (layers I and II): Active hard hammers are distinguished by their oblong shape with one or two active edges with numerous shock marks and often small flakes (chipping), as well as some cracks. These are recognized by the numerous traces of blows they have (microstars, percussion cones, fissures, random flakes, etc...).
It is possible that in the old and unsystematic excavations they went unnoticed, but it has also been said that the good stone hammers were so appreciated that the craftsman only abandoned them when they were useless. Semenov speaks of a deposit rich in hammering (in Polivanov, Russia), but, like the rest of the sites, they are almost all from the Neolithic period onwards. The size of hard hammers depends on their function: there are very large ones for roughing, medium ones are used for the main work, small ones are auxiliary tools to prepare percussion platforms, or retouch flakes. As for the shape, there are circular, oval, rectangular, etc... In fact, the shape depends a lot on the style of the craftsman (at least for prehistorians who experiment with flint carving who acquire styles, different positions, and tastes).
Despite the fact that stone hammers are more typical of the manufacture of wide and short flakes, used with mastery they can achieve very precise control of rock chipping. In fact, cases of blades manufacture with a hard hammer have been witnessed, mainly in the Middle European Paleolithic (almost always Levallois blades), but also in the Upper and Epipaleolithic. While the extraction of blades is more effective with other techniques, there are enough indications to affirm that it can also be done with a hard hammer. There are even exceptional cases of obsidian blade of more than 30 centimeters manufactured in pre-Columbian Mexico and ancient Ethiopia and greater examples in excess of 70 centimeters found in present-day California. Modern experimental carvers have not been able to recreate these methods.
Soft hammer
A soft hammer is a fragment of bone, deer antler or hardwood that is used to hit the rock and extract flakes. Soft hammers are usually about 30 or 40 cm long and the ideal size to hold in the hand. The material from which they are made is very varied, since throughout their history humans have hunted many species of deer throughout the globe, but experimental carvers particularly appreciate those of reindeer or caribou (although those of deer are the most common and affordable). The bovine horn is not as suitable as the cervid antler, as it has an external keratin coating separate from the bone core, however they can be used as retouchers. In the case of wood, only especially hard species serve, such as boxwood, holly, and perhaps oak. In any case, the soft hammer wears out with its use relatively quickly. Each blow eats a little from the hammer. Wood hammers wear down especially fast. The antler hammers last a little longer, but in the end they break due to fatigue. Observation with the naked eye reveals that the flint (or whatever the carved rock) leaves small splinters and stone chips embedded in the hammer.
In archaeological excavations, soft hammers are even rarer than hard ones, as they are organic and therefore perishable. François Bordes and Denise de Sonneville-Bordes exhumed one from the most recent Solutrean strata in the Laugerie-Haute cave (Dordogne). The piece was broken into several fragments and incomplete, but retained the functional end, where the marks of the blows could be seen and microscopic embedded flint bits were visible. The petrological analysis additionally determined that it was the same type of flint as the carved pieces extracted from the same archaeological layer.
Despite this brittleness, soft hammers have a series of advantages derived from their elasticity and resistance to stress-deformation. The soft hammer has a lower yield than the rock, that would make a layman think that it is impossible to carve flint or quartzite with a piece of wood or antler. However, its elastic limit is much higher, which makes it bear more tension and it is the rock that breaks, instead of the hammer. This does not happen, however, with the bone. Bone strikers are often unsuitable for carving, in fact bone is more of a carved raw material than rocks.
During the percussion itself, which lasts thousandths of a second, the soft hammer, being a non-isotropic linear elastic, varies its tension state and increases its internal energy in the form of elastic potential energy. The moment the rock reaches its elastic limit and breaks, the potential energy is released and the hammer returns to its original shape. Also due to its elasticity, the contact surface between hammer and rock is greater, since the hammer adapts to the percussion plane. The percussive area is larger, so the fracture is more diffuse than if one were to use a hard hammer, so the conchoid is also less pronounced. It is a process so fast that it is invisible to the human eye, but its consequences have been exploited for more than a million years. In practice, these elements give the craftsman greater control over carving, in easier-to-direct results, and in more precise and defined varnishing; in short, the carving is more efficient and its results more effective: Artifacts carved with a soft hammer have a much finer finish than those where only the hard hammer has been used.
The soft hammer appeared during the Lower Paleolithic, specifically in the Acheulean (it is very visible in certain bifaces), 700,000 years ago in Africa and half a million years ago in Eurasia. However, the soft hammer does not replace the hard hammer, on the contrary, it complements it. Typically, the roughing or preparation of the piece is done with a hard hammer, and the finish with a soft hammer. Carved objects have scars from both types of hammer. Often the finished and used tools were recycled, re-sharpened, possibly with hard hammer, so there would be several alternate phases of hard and soft hammer. Other times, in the case of the cores, although the extraction of flakes or sheets was done with a soft or pressure hammer (see below), the hard hammer was necessary to prepare the percussion platform and eliminate protrusions that could disrupt the operation.
The carving experiments of Professor Luis Benito del Rey, tenured professor of Prehistory at the University of Salamanca, serve to distinguish, with a certain degree of acceptable precision (since there is never complete certainty), carving scars by direct percussion with a hard hammer. and those of the soft hammer compared to each other.
The direct soft hammer was used throughout the Upper Paleolithic of Eurasia to obtain blades and flakes, by means of a specific preparation. Prehistoric carvers were able to obtain blades of over half a meter in length. Although the experiments have been able to recreate the methods used, they are still poorly known and the results are often subject to size accidents and fortuitous behavior of the material.
Precision and indirect percussion
Both percussion with an intermediate piece and pressure carving share common technical points, among them the difficulty of distinguishing the scars left by one and the other. The remaining nuclei of both are, on the other hand, completely different. In the case of pressure, the tool is no longer a hammer in the strict sense of the word, since the compressors, that is, the tools used, do not hit; they only press so hard that they exceed the elastic limit of the rocks, breaking them according to the conchoidal fracture model. For this reason, it is difficult not to associate the compressors with the hammers.
Hammer with intermediate piece (pointer)
Carving with an intermediate piece is a specialized technique for obtaining lithic blades. It is one of the steps of a laminar extraction method, which means that by itself it has no value, since it requires a previous preparation of the core and continuous maintenance gestures of the same (done this way, the work is very similar to that of a stonemason with his mallet and his chisel). If we consider the core to be ready, there are two known ways to use the pointer or intermediate piece:
The first is to hold the core between the knees, with the percussion platform up and the extraction face out. The end of the pointer is placed where we want to extract the blade and hit it decisively with a shaft that acts like a mallet. This method yields good products: long, medium-sized and highly standardized blades or sheets, but with a strong general curvature.
The second is to hold the core underfoot. This results in much straighter blades, but smaller ones. If one tries to increase their size carving accidents are more likely to occur.
It is thought that indirect percussion with a pointer appears in the Upper Palaeolithic, and it coexists with direct percussion. In any case, the scars of these techniques are impossible to distinguish, except in exceptional cases. In fact, it is difficult to identify the bone pointers in the excavations, since they hardly have characteristic marks, that is, different from a percussion with any other purpose. Proposed examples are that of the Fageolet cave (Dordogne), dated in the Gravettian, those of Villevallier and Armeau (Yonne), both Neolithic, and those of Spiennes (Belgium), from the same period.
Compressor
Unlike the technique of indirect percussion with a pointer, pressure carving with compressors is not only used for the extraction of flaked products (specifically stone blades), it is also used for retouching tools. In fact, pressure carving to obtain blades includes a vast repertoire of methods, not all of which are known to researchers. All of these methods require a certain level of specialization, as demonstrated by carving experiences. Because of its complexity and the fact that we do not discuss a striker, this section is brief.
There is a method of pressure retouching, called subparallel covering retouching (due to its morphological aspect), which was rediscovered by the American archaeologist and experimenter Donald E. Crabtree in the 70s, and expanded by this same archaeologist with the collaboration of Butler, Tixier and others. They have also developed many others, but this type of retouching is quite well known (In fact, many enthusiasts manufacture and sell highly accurate replicas in memory of the Native American heritage of certain regions) and the interest from researchers, experimental prehistorians, has gone to the extraction of blades by pressure. To carry out this technique, the piece must be held firmly on the palm of the left hand (holding the lithic artifact firmly is one of the most difficult techniques to learn). The compressor is held with the right or it is levered while holding the left hand between the thumb and the rest of the fingers, pressing as hard as possible. The compressor can be made of horn or ivory (sometimes with a flint embedded in the tip), but in Chalcolithic, which must be considered the golden age of this type of retouching due to the masterpieces obtained, the compressor could have a copper tip. If the technique is done well, the touches are usually very regular, parallel, and very flat over all.
On the other hand, if there is a Silver Age of pressure retouching, it must be the Solutrean, in the Upper Paleolithic (the most emblematic case being that of the Laurel blades); Although the technique was known before, it was hardly used. It disappeared for a time and reappeared in the Neolithic, lasting for a long time in foliaceous pieces of various sizes (from the tip of a stone arrow, to the Aztec ceremonial daggers, through the tips of the Clovis Culture or knives Egyptian Predynastics).
There are many techniques for pressure knapping, too many to describe in detail aside from a basic list:
Extraction of blades in hand with the help of a simple cervid horn compressor: If the flint is of good quality, blades of up to four cm in length and 7 mm in width are obtained, but the difficulty of holding the core firmly increases as the extraction progresses and the core becomes smaller, so carving accidents often occur.
Extraction of blades with a compressor and with a core fixation system in hand (a piece with a slot where the core is placed and which can be made of wood, bone or horn): The results are not significantly better, but they are more homogeneous, avoiding most carving accidents.
Extraction of blades with a system of fixation of the nucleus at hand and the help of a cane-compressor supported in the armpit: a method already experimented by Crabtree, allows to increase the force with which the nucleus is pressed, thus obtaining slightly larger blades and minimizing carving accidents.
Extraction of blades holding the nucleus in the ground by means of wooden fixing mechanisms and using walking sticks (crutches) resting on the chest or abdomen. The worker's posture can be standing (using weight to press) or sitting (less strength, but more control). The blades obtained approach fifteen centimeters long. In addition, they are more standardized, more homogeneous, and the nucleus can be exploited much more until it is completely exhausted.
Extraction of blades holding the nucleus in the ground by means of wooden fixing mechanisms and using walking sticks (crutches) supported on the abdomen. The position of the standing craftsperson allows the weight to be used to press; but the real trick is a recess in the cane, so that it can bend, making it more flexible. That is, adding to the weight of the body the potential energy of the warped cane.
Extraction of leaves holding the nucleus in the ground by means of wooden fixing mechanisms and using stick-compressors with a lever resting on the abdomen. The craftsperson's posture is sitting and grasping the cane at the opposite end, pulling it up. Thus, the lever attacks the core with a force greater than 300 kg. With this system, still under investigation, blades of more than 25 centimeters have been obtained.
Extraction of blades by pressure has the advantage, over indirect percussion with pointer, of producing much more rectilinear pieces, as was the case with the other method.
The extraction of leaves began, from the end of the Paleolithic, to be an increasingly complex and sophisticated method in which, as we see, the strikers are only one of the instruments used. As the extraction of blades was perfected, accessories were added: first the intermediate piece or pointer for indirect carving, then the abrasive pebbles to prepare percussion platforms, then the compressors with handles, later the core fixing systems (the former were used to hold them in the hand, then the feet, and finally autonomous, but increasingly complex), the latter attached to the crutches or walking sticks (at first they rested on the shoulder, then on the abdomen and finally on the chest), to which was added a bone, antler or copper tip, a lever mechanism and a recess to increase its elasticity and potential energy. All this points to an increasingly specialized industry, probably focused on trade; at least since the Chalcolithic. There may have been specialized workshops that supplied more or less wide areas from the source of origin of the raw material. A good example of the latter are the very long flint blades from Varna (Bulgaria), which could reach 44 centimeters in length, were made of imported flint and only appeared in the richest tombs dated to the 4th millennium BC.
The opposite case is that of the Valladolid reservoir of Los Cercados (municipality of Mucientes). There, a series of Copper Age finds appeared, basically wells filled with archaeological remains. One of them produced a series of utensils typical of an artisan, specialized in the carving of indigenous flint: carving waste, roughing products, flakes, discarded tools, and above all stone hammers and what have been called bone retouchers (this type of pieces are rarely preserved, that's why they are so important). Apparently in this site they specialized in foliaceous pieces, for example arrowheads, and sickle teeth; that is, it was a regional production destined for domestic use.
Modern metallic hammerstones
Stone carving, as is known, is one of the human forms of artistic manifestation and is used both in sculpture and in architecture. Currently, flint and other conchoidal fracture rocks are used as construction materials, either as ashlars or as an aesthetic coating. However, this phenomenon does not concern this article. On the other hand, the carving of flint or other rocks, in the prehistoric way, has persisted for use on agricultural instruments (sickles, threshing ...), spark stones (tinder lighters, flint firearms ...) and even manufacturers of semi-precious gemstones in India and other countries. The difference is usually that hammers with modern metal alloys are used.
England
To the north of the English region of Suffolk, there is a rich tradition of flint carving centered around the town of Brandon where prehistoric, probably Neolithic, flint mines called Grimes Graves are preserved. Apparently, from the historical origins of the town in the 14th century, flint was used as a construction material (including the bridge over the river that gave it strategic relevance). After the appearance of gunpowder, many of the Brandon's artisans dedicated themselves to making spark stones for firearms. Although advances in military technology ended this activity in the middle of the 20th century, there are still some master carvers who use various metal hammers.
Spain
Until a few decades ago, in Spanish towns such as Cantalejo (Segovia), flint was carved for the manufacture of agricultural threshing machines. The flint carving technique was very simple and standardized, aimed at obtaining wide and short but resistant chips of about three centimeters. For this, different hammers were used. The hammer used in the final phase, that of the flake itself, was a long and narrow-handled wooden peg, with a small, almost tiny, metal head with two thin and prominent ends. The metal mass of this type of hammer is very small compared to its long and flexible handle, which, in addition to increasing the speed of the blow, combines the potential energy of the wooden handle with the hardness of the small metal pick. Thus, a direct hard percussion is obtained, with a soft, elastic impact.
India
In the Gujarat region (India) there are still artisans who make thick chalcedony necklace beads by knapping. This activity is concentrated in the city of Cambay (or Khambhat) and has certain peculiarities; It uses the kickback technique between a pointed metal passive hammer and an active water buffalo horn hammer. The craftsmen shape the beads, holding them against the metal hammer and hitting them with the horn, causing little pieces to fly off little by little. The result is a very efficient method. Although the technique persists today, it is suspected that it must have appeared in very ancient times, perhaps with the first brass instruments, in the Chalcolithic.

A hand axe (or handaxe or Acheulean hand axe) is a prehistoric stone tool with two faces that is the longest-used tool in human history. It is made from stone, usually flint or chert that has been "reduced" and shaped from a larger piece by knapping, or hitting against another stone. They are characteristic of the lower Acheulean and middle Palaeolithic (Mousterian) periods, roughly 1.6 million years ago to about 100,000 years ago, and used by Homo erectus and other early humans, but rarely by Homo sapiens.
Their technical name (biface) comes from the fact that the archetypical model is a generally bifacial (with two wide sides or faces) and almond-shaped (amygdaloid) lithic flake. Hand axes tend to be symmetrical along their longitudinal axis and formed by pressure or percussion. The most common hand axes have a pointed end and rounded base, which gives them their characteristic almond shape, and both faces have been knapped to remove the natural cortex, at least partially. Hand axes are a type of the somewhat wider biface group of two-faced tools or weapons.
Hand axes were the first prehistoric tools to be recognized as such: the first published representation of a hand axe was drawn by John Frere and appeared in a British publication in 1800. Until that time, their origins were thought to be natural or supernatural. They were called thunderstones, because popular tradition held that they had fallen from the sky during storms or were formed inside the earth by a lightning strike and then appeared at the surface. They are used in some rural areas as an amulet to protect against storms.
Handaxes are generally thought to have been primarily used as cutting tools, particularly for tasks like animal butchery, with the wide base serving as an ergonomic area for the hand to grip the tool, though other secondary uses, such as throwing weapons and use as social and sexual signaling have been proposed.
Terminology
The four classes of hand axe are:
Large, thick hand axes reduced from cores or thick flakes, referred to as blanks
Thinned blanks. While form remains rough and uncertain, an effort has been made to reduce the thickness of the flake or core
Either a preform or crude formalized tool, such as an adze
Finer formalized tool types such as projectile points and fine bifaces
While Class 4 hand axes are referred to as "formalized tools", bifaces from any stage of a lithic reduction sequence may be used as tools. (Other biface typologies make five divisions rather than four.)
French antiquarian André Vayson de Pradenne introduced the word biface in 1920. This term co-exists with the more popular hand axe (coup de poing), that was coined by Gabriel de Mortillet much earlier. The continued use of the word biface by François Bordes and Lionel Balout supported its use in France and Spain, where it replaced the term hand axe. Use of the expression hand axe has continued in English as the equivalent of the French biface (bifaz in Spanish), while biface applies more generally for any piece that has been carved on both sides by the removal of shallow or deep flakes. The expression Faustkeil is used in German; it can be literally translated as hand axe, although in a stricter sense it means "fist wedge". It is the same in Dutch where the expression used is vuistbijl which literally means "fist axe". The same locution occurs in other languages.
However, the general impression of these tools was based on ideal (or classic) pieces that were of such perfect shape that they caught the attention of non-experts. Their typology broadened the term's meaning. Biface hand axes and bifacial lithic items are distinguished. A hand axe need not be a bifacial item and many bifacial items are not hand axes. Nor were hand axes and bifacial items exclusive to the Lower Palaeolithic period in the Old World. They appear throughout the world and in many different pre-historical epochs, without necessarily implying an ancient origin. Lithic typology is not a reliable chronological reference and was abandoned as a dating system. Examples of this include the "quasi-bifaces" that sometimes appear in strata from the Gravettian, Solutrean and Magdalenian periods in France and Spain, the crude bifacial pieces of the Lupemban culture (9000 B.C.) or the pyriform tools found near Sagua La Grande in Cuba. The word biface refers to something different in English than biface in French or bifaz in Spanish, which could lead to many misunderstandings. Bifacially carved cutting tools, similar to hand axes, were used to clear scrub vegetation throughout the Neolithic and Chalcolithic periods. These tools are similar to more modern adzes and were a cheaper alternative to polished axes. The modern day villages along the Sepik river in New Guinea continue to use tools that are virtually identical to hand axes to clear forest. "The term biface should be reserved for items from before the Würm II-III interstadial", although certain later objects could exceptionally be called bifaces.
Hand axe does not relate to axe, which was overused in lithic typology to describe a wide variety of stone tools. At the time the use of such items was not understood. In the particular case of Palaeolithic hand axes the term axe is an inadequate description. Lionel Balout stated, "the term should be rejected as an erroneous interpretation of these objects that are not 'axes'". Subsequent studies supported this idea, particularly those examining the signs of use.
Materials
Hand axes are mainly made of flint, but rhyolites, phonolites, quartzites and other coarse rocks were used as well. Obsidian, natural volcanic glass, shatters easily and was rarely used.
Uses
Most researchers think that handaxes were primarily used as cutting tools. The pioneers of Palaeolithic tool studies first suggested that bifaces were used as axes despite the fact that they have a sharp border all around. Other uses seem to show that hand axes were a multi-functional tool, leading some to describe them as the "Acheulean Swiss Army knife". Other academics have suggested that the hand axe was simply a byproduct of being used as a core to make other tools, a weapon, or was perhaps used ritually.
Wells proposed in 1899 that hand axes were used as missile weapons to hunt prey – an interpretation supported by Calvin, who suggested that some of the rounder specimens of Acheulean hand axes were used as hunting projectiles or as "killer frisbees" meant to be thrown at a herd of animals at a water hole so as to stun one of them. This assertion was inspired by findings from the Olorgesailie archaeological site in Kenya. Few specimens indicate hand axe hafting, and some are too large for that use. However, few hand axes show signs of heavy damage indicative of throwing, modern experiments have shown the technique to often result in flat-faced landings, and many modern scholars consider the "hurling" theory to be poorly conceived but so attractive that it has taken a life of its own.
As hand axes can be recycled, resharpened and remade, they could have been used for varied tasks. For this reason it may be misleading to think of them as axes; they could have been used for tasks such as digging, cutting, scraping, chopping, piercing, and hammering. However, other tools, such as small knives, are better suited for some of these tasks, and many hand axes have been found with no traces of use.
Baker suggested that since so many hand axes have been found that have no retouching, perhaps the hand axe was not itself a tool, but a large lithic core from which flakes had been removed and used as tools (flake core theory). On the other hand, there are many hand axes found with retouching such as sharpening or shaping, which casts doubt on this idea.
Other theories suggest the shape is part tradition and part by-product of its manufacture. Many early hand axes appear to be made from simple rounded pebbles (from river or beach deposits). It is necessary to detach a 'starting flake', often much larger than the rest of the flakes (due to the oblique angle of a rounded pebble requiring greater force to detach it), thus creating an asymmetry. Correcting the asymmetry by removing material from the other faces, encouraged a more pointed (oval) form factor. (Knapping a completely circular hand axe requires considerable correction of the shape.) Studies in the 1990s at Boxgrove, in which a butcher attempted to cut up a carcass with a hand axe, revealed that the hand axe was able to expose bone marrow.
Kohn and Mithen independently arrived at the explanation that symmetric hand axes were favoured by sexual selection as fitness indicators. Kohn in his book As We Know It wrote that the hand axe is "a highly visible indicator of fitness, and so becomes a criterion of mate choice." Miller followed their example and said that hand axes have characteristics that make them subject to sexual selection, such as that they were made for over a million years throughout Africa, Europe and Asia, they were made in large numbers, and most were impractical for utilitarian use. He claimed that a single design persisting across time and space cannot be explained by cultural imitation and draws a parallel between bowerbirds' bowers (built to attract potential mates and used only during courtship) and Pleistocene hominids' hand axes. He called hand axe building a "genetically inherited propensity to construct a certain type of object." He discards the idea that they were used as missile weapons because more efficient weapons were available, such as javelins. Although he accepted that some hand axes may have been used for practical purposes, he agreed with Kohn and Mithen who showed that many hand axes show considerable skill, design and symmetry beyond that needed for utility. Some were too big, such as the Maritime Academy handaxe or the "Great Hand Axe" found in Furze Platt, England that is 30.6 cm long (other scholars measure it as 39.5 cm long). Some were too small - less than two inches. Some were "overdetermined", featuring symmetry beyond practical requirements and showing evidence of unnecessary attention to form and finish. Some were actually made out of bone instead of stone and thus were not very practical, suggesting a cultural or ritual use. Miller thinks that the most important clue is that under electron microscopy hand axes show no signs of use or evidence of edge wear. Others argue that little evidence for use-wear simply relates to the particular sedimentological conditions, rather than being evidence of discarding without use. It has been noted that hand axes can be good handicaps in Zahavi's handicap principle theory: learning costs are high, risks of injury, they require physical strength, hand-eye coordination, planning, patience, pain tolerance and resistance to infection from cuts and bruises when making or using such a hand axe.
Evidence from wear analysis
The use-wear analysis of Palaeolithic hand axes is carried out on findings from emblematic sites across nearly all of Western Europe. Keeley and Semenov were the pioneers of this specialized investigation. Keeley stated, "The morphology of typical hand axes suggests a greater range of potential activities than those of flakes".
Many problems need to be overcome in carrying out this type of analysis. One is the difficulty in observing larger pieces with a microscope. Of the millions of known pieces and despite their long role in human history, few have been thoroughly studied. Another arises from the clear evidence that the same tasks were performed more effectively using utensils made from flakes:
This raises the question: why make hand axes, whose production is more complicated and costly, if the flakes can do the same work with the same efficiency? The answer could be that, in general, hand axes were not conceived for a particular function (excluding certain specialized types) [...], they were not made for one main task but covered a much more general purpose.
Keeley based his observations on archaeological sites in England. He proposed that in base settlements where it was possible to predict future actions and where greater control on routine activities was common, the preferred tools were made from specialized flakes, such as racloirs, backed knives, scrapers and punches. However, hand axes were more suitable on expeditions and in seasonal camps, where unforeseen tasks were more common. Their main advantage in these situations was the lack of specialization and adaptability to multiple eventualities. A hand axe has a long blade with different curves and angles, some sharper and others more resistant, including points and notches. All of this is combined in one tool. Given the right circumstances, it is possible to make use of loose flakes. In the same book, Keeley states that a number of the hand axes studied were used as knives to cut meat (such as hand axes from Hoxne and Caddington). He identified that the point of another hand axe had been used as a clockwise drill. This hand axe came from Clacton-on-Sea (all of these sites are located in the east of England). Toth reached similar conclusions for pieces from the Spanish site in Ambrona (Soria). Analysis carried out by Domínguez-Rodrigo and co-workers on the primitive Acheulean site in Peninj (Tanzania) on a series of tools dated 1.5 mya shows clear microwear produced by plant phytoliths, suggesting that the hand axes were used to work wood. Among other uses, use-wear evidence for fire making has been identified on dozens of later Middle Palaeolithic hand axes from France, suggesting Neanderthals struck these tools with the mineral pyrite to produce sparks at least 50,000 years ago.
A wear analysis of handaxes from the 480,000 year old late Acheulean Boxgrove site in England found that they were primarily if not exclusively used for animal butchery, with no evidence for their use in woodworking or digging.
Macroscopic traces
Some hand axes were used with force that left clearly visible marks. Other visible marks can be left as the scars from retouching, on occasion it is possible to distinguish them from marks left by the initial manufacture. One of the most common cases is when a point breaks. This was seen at sites in Europe, Africa and Asia. One example comes from the El Basalito site in Salamanca, where excavation uncovered fragments of a hand axe with marks at the tip that appeared to be the result of the action of a wedge, which would have subjected the object to high levels of torsion that broke the tip. A break or extreme wear can affect a tool's point or any other part. Such wear was reworked by means of a secondary working as discussed above. In some cases this reconstruction is easily identifiable and was carried out using techniques such as the coup de tranchet (French, meaning "tranchet blow"), or simply with scale or scalariform retouches that alter an edge's symmetry and line.
Forms
With its flattened-teardrop symmetry, the Achulean handaxe has long invited cognitive explanations. It is the earliest hominid tool that seems "designed" in some modern sense. Yet, for most of the "Swiss Army knife" multipurpose suite of proposed uses (defleshing, scraping, pounding roots, and flake source), an easy-to-make shape would suffice – and indeed the simpler tools continued to be made. None of these uses adequately addresses the "design aspects". Why is the handaxe mostly symmetric, why mostly flattened, why the seldom-sharp point, why sharpened all around (when that interferes with gripping the tool for pounding uses)? Neither does a suite of uses suggest why this form could remain the same from southern Africa to northern Europe to eastern Asia – and resist cultural drift for so long. The handaxe technique and its rationale were surely lost many times, just as Tasmanians lost fishing and fire-starting practices. So how did Homo erectus keep rediscovering the enigmatic handaxe shape, over and over for nearly 1.5 million years?
The most characteristic and common shape is a pointed area at one end, cutting edges along its side and a rounded base (this includes hand axes with a lanceolate and amygdaloidal shape as well as others from the family). The axes are almost always symmetrical despite studies showing that hand axe symmetry does not help in tasks such as skinning animals. While there is a "typical" shape to most hand axes, there are some displaying a variety of shapes, including circular, triangular and elliptical—calling in to question the contention that they had a constant and only symbolic significance. They are typically between 8 and 15 cm (3 and 6 in) long, although they can be bigger or smaller.
They were typically made from a rounded stone, a block or lithic flake, using a hammer to remove flakes from both sides of the item. This hammer can be made of hard stone, or of wood or antler. The latter two, softer hammers can produce more delicate results. However, a hand axe's technological aspect can reflect more differences. For example, uniface tools have only been worked on one side and partial bifaces retain a high proportion of the natural cortex of the tool stone, often making them easy to confuse with chopping tools. Further, simple bifaces may have been created from a suitable tool stone, but they rarely show evidence of retouching. Later hand axes were improved by the use of the Levallois technique to make the more sophisticated and lighter Levallois core.
In summary, hand axes are recognized by many typological schools under different archaeological paradigms and are quite recognisable (at least the most typical examples). However, they have not been definitively categorized. Stated more formally, the idealised model combines a series of well-defined properties, but no set of these properties are necessary or sufficient to identify a hand axe.
The study of hand axes is made complicated because its shape is the result of a complicated chain of technical actions that are only occasionally revealed in their later stages. If this complexity of intentions during the manufacture of a hand axe is added to its variety of forms [...] we realise that the hand axe is one of the most problematical and complex objects in Prehistory
History and distribution
In 1969 in the 2nd edition of World Prehistory, Grahame Clark proposed an evolutionary progression of flint-knapping industries (also known as complexes or technocomplexes) in which the "dominant lithic technologies" occurred in a fixed sequence where simple Oldowan one-edged tools were replaced by these more complex Acheulean hand axes, which were then eventually replaced by the even more complex Mousterian tools made with the Levallois technique.
The oldest known Oldowan tools were found in Gona, Ethiopia. These are dated to about 2.6 mya.
Early examples of hand axes date back to 1.6 mya in the later Oldowan (Mode I), called the "developed Oldowan" by Mary Leakey. These hand axes became more abundant in mode II Acheulean industries that appeared in Southern Ethiopia around 1.4 mya. Some of the best specimens come from 1.2 mya deposits in Olduvai Gorge.
By 1.8 mya early man was present in Europe. Remains of their activities were excavated in Spain at sites in the Guadix-Baza basin and near Atapuerca. Most early European sites yield "mode 1" or Oldowan assemblages. The earliest Acheulean sites in Europe appear around 0.5 mya. In addition, the Acheulean tradition did not spread to Eastern Asia. In Europe and particularly in France and England, the oldest hand axes appear after the Beestonian Glaciation–Mindel Glaciation, approximately 750,000 years ago, during the so-called Cromerian complex. They became more widely produced during the Abbevillian tradition.
Distribution of bifacial industries
The apogee of hand axe manufacture took place in a wide area of the Old World, especially during the Riss glaciation, in a cultural complex that can be described as cosmopolitan and which is known as the Acheulean. The use of hand axes survived the Middle Palaeolithic in a much smaller area and were especially important during the Mousterian, up to the middle of the Last glacial period.
[In Europe s]mall bifaces are found from the late Acheulean until the Aurignacian
Hand axes dating from the lower Palaeolithic were found on the Asian continent, on the Indian subcontinent and in the Middle East (to the south of parallel 40° N), but they were absent from the area to the east of the 90° E meridian. Movius designated a border (the so-called Movius Line) between the cultures that used hand axes to the west and those that made chopping tools and small retouched lithic flakes, such as were made by Peking Man and the Ordos culture in China, or their equivalents in Indochina such as the Hoabinhian. However, Movius' hypothesis was proved incorrect when many hand axes made in the Palaeolithic era were found in 1978 at Hantan River, Jeongok, Yeoncheon County, South Korea for the first time in East Asia. Some of them are exhibited at the Jeongok Prehistory Museum, South Korea.
Additional discoveries in Southeast Asia have further challenged the traditional interpretation of the Movius Line. In the Philippines, the Arubo 1 Archaeological Site in General Tinio, Nueva Ecija, yielded bifacial lithic assemblages including a proto-handaxe and bifacial cleaver associated with chert quarrying and workshop activity. The bifacial assemblage from Arubo has been interpreted as evidence of technological variability in Southeast Asian Lower Palaeolithic industries and has been discussed in relation to wider debates concerning Acheulean-like technologies east of the traditional Movius Line.
The Padjitanian culture from Java was traditionally thought to be the only oriental culture to manufacture hand axes. However, a site in Baise, Guangxi, China shows that hand axes were made in eastern Asia.
Hand axe technology is almost unknown in Australian prehistory, although a few have been found.
Construction
Experiments in knapping have demonstrated the relative ease with which a hand axe can be made, which could help explain their success. In addition, they demand relatively little maintenance and allow a choice of raw materials–any rock will suffice that supports a conchoidal fracture. With early hand axes, it is easy to improvise their manufacture, correct mistakes without requiring detailed planning, and no long or demanding apprenticeship is necessary to learn the necessary techniques. These factors combine to allow these objects to remain in use throughout pre-history. Their adaptability makes them effective in a variety of tasks, from heavy duty such as digging in soil, felling trees or breaking bones to delicate such as cutting ligaments, slicing meat or perforating a variety of materials.
Later examples of hand axes are more sophisticated with their use of two layers of knapping (one made with stone knapping and one made with bone knapping).
Lastly, a hand axe represents a prototype that can be refined giving rise to more developed, specialised and sophisticated tools such as the tips of various projectiles, knives, adzes and hatchets.
Analysis
Given the typological difficulties in defining the essence of a hand axe, it is important when analysing them to take account of their archaeological context (geographical location, stratigraphy, the presence of other elements associated with the same level, chronology etc.). It is necessary to study their physical state to establish any natural alterations that may have occurred: patina, shine, wear and tear, mechanical, thermal and / or physical-chemical changes such as cracking, in order to distinguish these factors from the scars left during the tool's manufacture or use.
The raw material is an important factor, because of the result that can be obtained by working it and in order to reveal the economy and movement of prehistoric humans. In the Olduvai Gorge the raw materials were most readily available some ten kilometres from the nearest settlements. However, flint or silicate is readily available on the fluvial terraces of Western Europe. This means that different strategies were required for the procurement and use of available resources. The supply of materials was the most important factor in the manufacturing process as Palaeolithic artisans were able to adapt their methods to available materials, obtaining adequate results from even the most difficult raw materials. Despite this it is important to study the rock's grain, texture, the presence of joints, veins, impurities or shatter cones etc.
In order to study the use of individual items it is necessary to look for traces of wear such as pseudo-retouches, breakage or wear, including areas that are polished. If the item is in a good condition it is possible to submit it to use-wear analysis, which is discussed in more detail below. Apart from these generalities, which are common to all carved archaeological pieces, hand axes need a technical analysis of their manufacture and a morphological analysis.
Technical analysis
The technical analysis of a hand axe tries to discover each of the phases in its chaîne opératoire (operational sequence). The chain is highly flexible, as a toolmaker may focus narrowly on just one of the sequence's links or equally on each link. The links examined in this type of study start with the extraction methods of the raw material, then include the actual manufacture of the item, its use, maintenance throughout its working life, and finally its disposal.
A toolmaker may put a lot of effort into finding the highest quality raw material or the most suitable tool stone. In this way more effort is invested in obtaining a good foundation, but time is saved on shaping the stone: that is, the effort is focused on the start of the operational chain. Equally the artisan may concentrate the most effort in the manufacture so that the quality or suitability of the raw material is less important. This will minimize the initial effort, but will result in a greater effort at the end of the operational chain.
Tool stone and cortex
Hand axes are most commonly made from rounded pebbles or nodules, but many are also made from a large flake. Hand axes made from flakes first appeared at the start of the Acheulean period and became more common with time. Manufacturing a hand axe from a flake is actually easier than from a pebble. It is also quicker, as flakes are more likely to be closer to the desired shape. This allows easier manipulation and fewer knaps are required to finish the tool; it is also easier to obtain straight edges. When analysing a hand axe made from a flake, it should be remembered that its shape was predetermined (by use of the Levallois technique or Kombewa technique or similar).
The natural external cortex or rind of the tool stone, which is due to erosion and the physical-chemical alterations of weathering, is different from the stone's interior. In the case of chert, quartz or quartzite, this alteration is basically mechanical, and apart from the colour and the wear it has the same characteristics as the interior in terms of hardness, toughness etc. However, flint is surrounded by a limestone cortex that is soft and unsuitable for stone tools. As hand axes are made from a tool stone's core, it is normal to indicate the thickness and position of the cortex in order to better understand the techniques that are required in their manufacture. The variation in cortex between utensils should not be taken as an indication of their age.
Many partially-worked hand axes do not require further work in order to be effective tools. They can be considered to be simple hand axes. Less suitable tool stone requires more thorough working. In some specimens the cortex is unrecognisable due to the complete working that it has undergone, which has eliminated any vestige of the original cortex.
Types
It is possible to distinguish multiple types of hand axe:
Uniface—flaked on one face with cortex completely covering the other side. This characteristic does not disqualify such tools as hand axes and gives no indication of their age.
Partial biface—The cortex is present on the tool's base and central part. The overall area that is not knapped may extend to up to two thirds of its length.
Bifaces with basal cortex coverage—Only the artefact's base is covered with cortex, which does not cover more than a third of total length. In some cases the cortex is present on both the base and one side, thereby affecting one edge: such tools are called "natural backed". De Mortillet emphasised the importance of the presence or absence of the cortex around the edge in the 19th century: "Even on some of the best worked pieces it is common to see, sometimes on the base but more often on the side, a small area that has not been worked, that is uncut. It could be thought that this is a mistake or an error. But often the most probable reason for this is that it was intentional. There are a large number of hand axes with an uncut base, unworked or partially cleaned ... an area has intentionally been left on these pieces as a grip, it is called the heel. This heel acts as a handle as it is easy to grip". (This hypothesis remains unproven and is not commonly used.)
Hand axes with residual cortex on an edge—The whole of their edges are knapped except for a small area where the cortex remains (leaving a small area without a sharp edge). This area can be at the base, side or oblique. In all cases it is small, leaving cutting edges on both sides.
Hand axes with a cutting edge around the whole circumference—The circumference is knapped to a cutting edge, although some residual areas of cortex may persist on either face, without affecting the cutting edge's effectiveness.
Production
Older hand axes were produced by direct percussion with a stone hammer and can be distinguished by their thickness and a sinuous border. Mousterian hand axes were produced with a soft billet of antler or wood and are much thinner, more symmetrical and have a straight border. An experienced flintknapper needs less than 15 minutes to produce a good quality hand axe. A simple hand axe can be made from a beach pebble in less than 3 minutes.
The manufacturing process employs lithic reduction. This phase is commonly thought of as the most important in hand axe fabrication, although it is not always used, such as for hand axes made from flakes or a suitable tool stone. An important concern is the implement that has been used to form the biface. If multiple implements were used, it is essential to discover in what order they were used and the result obtained by each one. The most common implements are:
Hard hammer faces
Hand axes can be made without subsequent reworking of the edges. A hammerstone was the most common percussive tool used during the Acheulean. The resulting artefact is usually easily recognizable given its size and irregular edges, as the removed flakes leave pronounced percussion bulbs and compression rings. A hammerstone produces a small number of flakes that are wide and deep leaving long edges on the tool as their highly concave form yields curving edges. The cross-section is irregular, often sub-rhombic, while the intersection between the faces forms an acute angle of between 60° and 90° degrees. The shape is similar to that of the core as the irregularities formed during knapping are not removed. The notches obtained were exploited in the production sequence. It is common that this type of manufacture yields "partial bifaces" (an incomplete working that leaves many areas covered with cortex), "unifaces" (tools that have only been worked on one face), "bifaces in the Abbevillian style" and "nucleiform bifaces". This type of manufacturing style is generally an indication of the age when a tool was made and with other archaeological data can provide a context that allows its age to be estimated.
Hard hammer faces and edges
These hand axes have a more balanced appearance as the modification consists of a second (or third) series of blows to make the piece more uniform and provide a better finish. The modification is often called retouching and is sometimes carried out using invasive retouching or using softer, marginal, shallow blows that are only applied to the most marked irregularities leaving scale-like marks. The modification of edges with a hard hammer was carried out from the beginning of the Acheulean and persisted into the Mousterian. It is therefore not useful as an indicator of chronology (in order for it to be considered as a marker it has to be accompanied by other complementary and independent archaeological data). The hand axes arising from this methodology have a more classical profile with either a more symmetrical almond or oval shape and with a lower proportion of the cortex of the original core. It is not always the case that the retouching had the objective of reducing an edge's irregularities or deformities. In fact, it has been shown that in some cases the retouching was carried out to sharpen an edge that had been blunted by use or a point that had deteriorated.
Soft hammer finish
Some hand axes were formed with a hard hammer and finished with a soft hammer. Blows that result in deep conchoidal fractures (the first phase of manufacture) can be distinguished from features resulting from sharpening with a soft hammer. The latter leaves shallower, more distended, broader scars, sometimes with small, multiple shock waves. However, marks left by a small, hard hammer can leave similar marks to a soft hammer.
Soft hammer finished pieces are usually balanced and symmetrical, and can be relatively smooth. Soft hammer works first appeared in the Acheulean period, allowing tools with these markings to be used as a post quem estimation, but with no greater precision. The main advantage of a soft hammer is that a flintknapper is able to remove broader, thinner flakes with barely developed heels, which allows a cutting edge to be maintained or even improved with minimal raw material wastage. However, a high-quality raw material is required to make their use effective. No studies compare the two methods in terms of yield per unit weight of raw material, or the difference in energy use. The use of a soft hammer requires greater use of force by the flintknapper and a steeper learning curve, although it offers more flakes for less raw material.
Soft hammer only
Hand axes made using only a soft hammer are much less common. In most cases at least initial work was done with a hard hammer, before subsequent flaking with a soft hammer erased all vestiges of that work. A soft hammer is not suitable for all types of percussion platform and it cannot be used on certain types of raw material. It is, therefore, necessary to start with a hard hammer or with a flake as a core as its edge will be fragile (flat, smooth pebbles are also useful). This means that although it was possible to manufacture a hand axe using a soft hammer, it is reasonable to suppose that a hard hammer was used to prepare a blank followed by one or more phases of retouching to finish the piece. However, the degree of separation between the phases is not certain, as the work could have been carried out in one operation.
Working with a soft hammer allows a knapper greater control of the knapping and reduces waste of the raw material, allowing the production of longer, sharper, more uniform edges that will increase the tool's working life. Hand axes made with a soft hammer are usually more symmetrical and smooth, with rectilinear edges and shallow indentations that are broad and smooth so that it is difficult to distinguish where one flake starts and another ends. They generally have a regular biconvex cross-section and the intersection of the two faces forms an edge with an acute angle, usually of around 30°. They were worked with great skill and therefore they are more aesthetically attractive. They are usually associated with periods of highly developed tool making such as the Micoquien or the Mousterian. Soft hammer manufacturing is not reliable as the sole dating method.
Hand axes were created to be tools and as such they wore out, deteriorated and/or broke during use. Relics have suffered dramatic changes throughout their useful lives. It is common to find edges that have been sharpened, points that have been reconstructed and profiles that have been deformed by reworking in order to extend the piece's useful lifetime. Some tools were recycled later, leading Bordes to note that hand axes "are sometimes found in the Upper Palaeolithic. Their presence, which is quite normal in the Perigordian I, is often due, in other levels, to the collection of Mousterian or Acheulean tools."
Morphology
Hand axes have traditionally been oriented with their narrowest part upwards (presupposing that this would have been the most active part, which is not unreasonable given the many hand axes that have unworked bases). The following typological conventions are used to facilitate communication. The axis of symmetry that divides a biface in two is called the morphological axis. The main face is usually the most regular and better worked face. The base (not the heel) is the bottom of the hand axe.
Terminal zone—the narrowest end, opposite the base. Its most common shape is pointed, more or less acute or oval. Some hand axes have terminal ends that are rounded or polygonal (i.e. not pointed) while others have terminal ends that are transversal to the axis, called cleaver or spatulate.
Proximal end (base)—opposite the terminal end (usually broader and thicker), it can be described as either reserved (partially or totally worked, but not cut); or cut, with a rounded (polygonal), flat or pointed end.
Edges—convex, rectilinear or concave, and more or less even. Edges on some specimens are denticulate—scalloped—or notched. Some specimens have unsharpened edges. The profile of a hand axe's worked edges can be regular without pronounced rectilinear deviations (the edge is gently curved in the form of an S) or an edge may be more sinuous and wave-formed with pronounced curves or deviations in the edge's profile. On some specimens only selected areas have been formed into a working edge.
Cross section—the horizontal cross-section taken at some distance from the base. It is possible to discern retouching or rebuilding in deteriorated parts of the edges. The following types of cross section are commonly seen: triangular (sub-triangular and backed triangular), rhombic (rhomboidal and backed rhomboidal), trapezium (trapezoid and backed trapezoidal), pentagon (pentagonal and backed pentagonal), polygonal, biconvex or lenticular (sub lenticular).
Profile—By definition, hand axes have a roughly balanced outline, with a morphological axis that also serves as an axis of bilateral symmetry and a plane that serves as an axis of bifacial symmetry. Not all hand axes are perfectly symmetrical. Symmetry was achieved only after millennia of development. Symmetry may not make tools more useful. Hand axes were used in a variety of heavy physical tasks. They deteriorated, wore out and broke and were often repaired with retouching of their edges, recovery of their points or complete reworking. The majority of discovered pieces are remains, pieces that have been discarded after a long life as tools, during which they often were damaged and/or adapted for specialized tasks. Such pieces may have lost whatever symmetry they initially had. Hand axe profiles can be classified into the following categories:
Dimensions and ratios
Hand axe measurements use the morphological axis as a reference and for orientation. In addition to length, width, depth, specialists have proposed a wide range of other physical quantities. The most common were proposed by Bordes and Balout:
Maximum length (L)
Maximum width (m)
Maximum depth (e)
Distance from the base to the zone with the maximum width (a)
Width 3/4 of the way along the piece (o)
A and o can be used to delineate the contour's cross section and to measure the angles of the edges (provided this is not an area covered in the stone's original cortex). These angular measurements for the edges are made using a goniometer.
Edge length, weight and the length of the chord described by the edges (if the piece has a transverse terminal bezel) can be measured. These measurements allow morphological and technical ratios to be established (for example, the relationship between the weight and the length of the cutting edges, or the relationship between the hammer used to form the piece and the angle obtained etc.).
The most commonly used coefficients were established by Bordes for the morphological-mathematical classification of what he called "classic bifaces" (Balout proposed other, similar indices):
Bordes hand axe typology
Hand axes are so varied that they do not actually have a single common characteristic… [...] Despite the numerous attempts to classify hand axes, some of which date to the beginning of the [20th] century... their study does not comply completely satisfactorily to any typological list
The following guide is strongly influenced by the possibly outdated and basically morphological "Bordes method" classification system. This classification is particularly applicable to classic hand axes, those that can be defined and catalogued by measuring dimensions and mathematical ratios, while disregarding nearly all subjective criteria. "Distinguishing between different types of hand axes is not always easy. There is often no room for doubts, however, there are a number of cases where the difficulty is real." In the majority of cases, this system agrees with previously established categories (although slightly redefining them). Balout made a similar attempt at categorization.
Non-classic specimens
Many specimens defeat objective classification. Bordes created a group he called "non-classic bifaces" to which mathematical indexes do not apply.
Tools sometimes categorized as bifaces
Hand axes constitute an important group artefacts from the Acheulean. They are particularly important in open air archaeological sites (Keelley suggested that they are less common in cave sites). Hand axes, chopping tools and trihedral picks are considered core utensils, which were commonly manufactured out of stones, blocks or rock nodules. However this grouping is problematic as these tools were often also fabricated from (large) flakes. Another common suggestion is to refer to flake tools as micro industry, as opposed to the more general size referred to as macro industry, which includes hand axes and cleavers. However, some scrapers are as big as hand axes.
The most elaborated chopping tools and partial hand axes are linked and it is often difficult to distinguish between them. The concept of chopping tools is based on their lack of formal standardization (which is typical of hand axes) and includes the possibility that the pieces are shallow cores, which is unthinkable for the bifaces (except the nucleiforms).
While hand axes and cleavers occasionally served for similar tasks, their design is fundamentally different.
Trihedral picks are no longer considered a specialized type of hand axe.
Another group of tools commonly associated with hand axes is the biface leafpoint tools from the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic in the Old World. The difference between the two types is based on the latter's fine, light finishing with a soft hammer and in a morphology that suggests a specific function, possibly as the point of a projectile or a knife. Representatives of these tools include well known examples from the specialized literature:The term leaf piece should be prefixed to leaf point, as many of them are not pointed. They have been found sporadically in a number of Mousterian sites in France, but they are most common in central European Mousterian sites and African sites from the end of the Aterian
The biface leafpoint tools of central Europe are called Blattspitzen (lit. 'leaf points'). They are projectile points belonging to the Middle Palaeolithic with a leaf-shaped form. They are often dual pointed and flat, making them similar to Solutrean laurel leaf blades. It is possible to distinguish the two only from their archaeological context. Blattspitzen survived in some Upper Palaeolithic cultures. The pieces from the eastern European Szeletien culture (both Blattspitzen and Micoquian bifaces) could be the link that connects the tradition of Lower and Middle Palaeolithic bifacial objects with those from the Upper Palaeolithic and beyond.
Hand axes found in Africa come from both the Aterian culture of North Africa and the Stillbay culture from East Africa. Both these cases relate to Mousterian cultures, although they are relatively late and have their own style, at the end of the so-called African Middle Stone Age. In both cases a variety of objects are found, triangular, oval and other leaf-point. Hand axes and unifaces also came from other cultures.
Importance
The hand axe helped establish that early humans were capable of constructing relatively sophisticated tools that also reflected a sense of aesthetics. The 19th century publications of Frere, and more importantly of Boucher de Perthes, in France, described pieces that were balanced, symmetrical and crafted with a formal purity. Vilanova i Piera published similar works in Spain. This work was continued by Pérez de Barradas and del Prado at the start of the 20th century.
Art passed through a long formative period before becoming beautiful; but this does not mean that it ever stopped being a sincere and grandiose art, sometime more sincere and grandiose than beautiful; in mankind there is a creative nature that is manifested as soon as its existence is assured. When he was not worried or fearful, this demigod acting in tranquillity, found the material in his surroundings to breathe life into his spirit.
As Leroi-Gourhan explained, it is important to ask what was understood of art at the time, considering the psychologies of non-modern humans. Archaeological records documenting rapid progress towards symmetry and balance surprised Leroi-Gourha. He felt that he could recognize beauty in early prehistoric tools made during the Acheulean:
It seems difficult to admit that these beings did not experience a certain aesthetic satisfaction, they were excellent craftsmen that knew how to choose their material, repair defects, orient cracks with total precision, drawing out a form from a crude flint core that corresponded exactly to their desire. Their work was not automatic or guided by a series of actions in strict order, they were able to mobilize in each moment reflection and, of course, the pleasure of creating a beautiful object.
Many authors who comment on the Westfield aspect of hand axes refer only to exceptional pieces. The majority of hand axes tended to symmetry, but lack artistic appeal. Generally, only the most striking pieces are considered, mainly 19th or early 20th century collections. At that time a lack of knowledge regarding prehistoric technology prevented a recognition of human actions in these objects. Other collections were made by aficionados, whose interests were not scientific, so that they collected only objects they considered to be outstanding, abandoning humbler elements that were sometimes necessary to interpret an archaeological site. Exceptions include sites methodically studied by experts where magnificently carved, abundant hand axes caused archaeologists to express admiration for the artists:
Such is the perfection of the carving on some hand axes that they give the impression that the artist took great pleasure in them per se, at least apparently, as the working does not make the pieces any more efficient. At any rate, we are unable to pronounce from this remove whether it was art or the utility of the hand axe that was being sought by making them so well. Although, in our heart of hearts we are sure that they were searching for beauty, aesthetics, as they could have achieved the same efficiency with cruder pieces.
The discovery in 1998 of an oval hand axe of excellent workmanship in the Sima de los Huesos in the Atapuerca Mountains mixed in with the fossil remains of Homo heidelbergensis reignited this controversy. Given that this is the only lithic remnant from this section of the site (possibly a burial ground), combined with the piece's qualities led it to receive special treatment, it was even baptized Excalibur and it became a star item. Interest in the symbolic meaning of this example in particular, and hand axes in general, has multiplied in recent years, feeding both scientific and more general debate and literature.
Basch offered this counterargument:
Art is always the same, it is only possible to call someone an artist if they know how to create, within objective limits, the equivalent of the numinous complex experienced individually and expressed in a suitable manner in relation to the society in which the artist lives. In this was it is possible to distinguish an essentially artistic piece from a useful tool, although this may also be beautiful. When a prehistoric man was able to achieve the marvels that are the Acheulean axes, he did not make a work of art; nor did he make a work of art when he used his skill and experience to make a house or adapt rock shelters or caves for living or sanctuary.
Paradoxically, within the wide range of Acheulean objects, hand axes are one of the simplest tools. They do not require as much planning as other types of object, generally made from flakes, that are less striking but more sophisticated.
Archaeologists have evidence of hand axes that are 1.2 million years old in Melka Kunturé (Ethiopia), but the oldest, from Konso-Gardula, could be 1.9 million years old: Although it is now known that they are the heritage of a number of human species, with Homo ergaster the earliest, up until 1954 no solid evidence indicated who had fabricated hand axes: in that year, in Ternifine, Algeria, Arambourg discovered remains that he called Atlanthropus, along with some hand axes. All the species associated with hand axes (from H. ergaster to H. neanderthalensis) show an advanced intelligence that in some cases is accompanied by modern features such as a relatively sophisticated technology, systems to protect against inclement weather (huts, control of fire, clothing), and certain signs of spiritual awareness (early indications of art such as adorning the body, carving of bones, ritual treatment of bodies, articulated language).
Image gallery

Hardstone carving, in art history and archaeology, is the artistic carving of semi-precious stones (and sometimes gemstones), such as jade, rock crystal (clear quartz), agate, onyx, jasper, serpentinite, or carnelian, and for objects made in this way. Normally the objects are small, and the category overlaps with both jewellery and sculpture. Hardstone carving is sometimes referred to by the Italian term pietre dure; however, pietra dura (with an "a") is the common term used for stone inlay work, which causes some confusion.
From the Neolithic period until about the 19th century such objects were among the most highly prized in a wide variety of cultures, often attributed special powers or religious significance, but today coverage in non-specialist art history tends to be relegated to a catch-all decorative arts or "minor arts" category. The types of objects carved have included those with ritual or religious purposes, engraved gems as signet rings and other kinds of seal, handles, belt hooks and similar items, vessels and purely decorative objects.
Scope of the term
Hardstone carving falls under the general category of glyptic art, which covers small carvings and sculpture in all categories of stone. The definition in this context of "hardstone" is unscientific and not very rigid, but excludes "soft" stones such as soapstone (steatite) and minerals such as alabaster, both widely used for carving, as well as typical stones for building and monumental sculpture, such as marble and other types of limestone, and sandstone. These are typically not capable of a fine finish in very small carvings, and would wear in prolonged use. In other contexts, such as architecture, "hard stone" and "soft stone" have different meanings, referring to actual measured hardness using the Mohs scale of mineral hardness and other measures. Some rocks used in architecture and monumental sculpture, such as granite, are at least as hard as the gemstones, and others such as malachite are relatively soft but counted as hardstones because of their rarity and fine colour.
Essentially, any stone that is often used in jewellery is likely to count as a hardstone. Hard organic minerals such as amber and jet are included, as well as the mineraloid obsidian. Hardstones normally have to be drilled rather than worked with edged tools to achieve a fine finish. Geologically speaking, most of the gemstones traditionally carved in the West are varieties of quartz, including: chalcedony, agate, amethyst, sard, onyx, carnelian, heliotrope, jasper, and quartz in its uncoloured and transparent form, known as rock crystal. The various materials called jade have been dominant in East Asian and Mesoamerican carving. Stones typically used for buildings and large sculpture are not often used for small objects such as vessels, although this does occur. For example, in the Uruk period of Sumerian culture (4th millennium BCE) heavy vases, cups and ewers of sandstone and limestone have been found, but were not for common use, as the people of Uruk had well-developed pottery.
History
Asia and the Islamic world
The art is very ancient, going back to the Indus Valley civilization and beyond, and major traditions include cylinder seals and other small carvings in the Ancient Near East, which were also made in softer stones. Inlays of semi-precious stones were often used for decoration or highlights in sculptures of other materials, for example statues often had eyes inlaid with white shell and blue lapis lazuli or another stone.
Chinese jade carving begins with the carving of ritual objects, including blades for ji and dagger-axes clearly never intended for use, and the "Six Ritual Jades" including the bi and cong, which according to much later literature represented heaven and earth respectively. These are found from the Neolithic Liangzhu culture (3400-2250 BCE) onwards, and blades from the 2nd millennium BCE Shang dynasty on. Traditional Chinese culture attaches strong powers to jade; the jade burial suits in which aristocrats of the Han dynasty (206 BCE–220 CE) were buried were intended to preserve the body from decay.
The Chinese and other cultures often attributed specific properties for detecting and neutralizing poison to gemstones, a belief still alive in the European Renaissance, as shown by the works of Georgius Agricola, the "father of mineralogy". The English word "jade" derives (via the Spanish piedra de ijada) from the Aztec belief that the mineral cured ailments of the kidneys and sides. The Han period also saw the beginning of the tradition of fine decorative jade carving which has lasted until modern times, though the fine carving of other hardstones did not develop until the 17th century, and then appears to have been produced in different workshops and styles from those for jade. In general whiteish nephrite jade was the most highly regarded in China until about 1800, when the deeper and brighter green of the best jadeite became more highly favoured. There are related Asian traditions of Korean jade carving, in Southeast Asia and, to a much lesser extent, Japan.
Smallish Sassanian carvings are known, mostly for seals or jewellery; the central medallion of the "Cup of Chosroes" (gallery) is one of the largest. Egyptian carving of rock crystal into vessels appears in the late 10th century, and virtually disappears after about 1040. In 1062 the Cairo palace of the Fatimid Caliphate was looted by his mercenaries, and the examples found in European treasuries, like the one illustrated, may have been acquired as the booty was dispersed. The rock crystal used in Egypt was apparently traded from East Africa.
Until recently it was thought that jade carving was introduced to the central Asian Islamic world in the Timurid period, but it is becoming clearer that archers' thumb rings, knife hilts, and various other objects had been carved for centuries, even millennia before, though in limited numbers. Islamic jades and other carvings reached a particular peak in the Mughal Empire, where apart from portable carvings inlaid panels of carved stones were included in buildings such as the Taj Mahal. The great wealth of the Mughal court allowed precious stones like rubies and emeralds to be inset freely in objects. The court workshops of the Ottoman Empire also produced lavish and elaborate objects, in similar styles but without reaching the artistic peaks of Mughal carving.
Western traditions
From the early civilizations of the near East descended the carving of vessels and small statues in Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome and subsequent Western art, and also Sassanian Persia; however it is not very significant in the art of ancient Egypt, outside jewellery, as alabaster was a more common material. The jade signet ring of Tutankhamun has been called a "unique specimen" of Egyptian jade. Among the seals of the Minoan civilization during the Aegean Bronze Age, the Pylos Combat Agate dated circa 1450 BC is considered one of the finest works of that era, depicting naturalistic details of the human body comparable to works of the much later Classical period.
Hardstone carving more often refers to vessels and figures than smaller engraved gems for seal rings or made as objéts d'art, which were the main artistic expression of hardstone carving in the Greek Classical and Hellenistic periods, and are regarded separately. From the Hellenistic period elaborate vessels in semi-precious stone begin to appear, mostly carved, some in cameo. The Cup of the Ptolemies and Farnese Cup both appear to have been made in Alexandria in Ptolemaic Egypt, as does a simpler fluted sardonyx cup in Washington which, like the Cup of the Ptolemies, was adapted to be a Christian chalice, and given elaborate gold and jewelled mounts by Abbot Suger for his Abbey of St Denis about 1140. The elaborately carved Rubens Vase, now in Baltimore, is thought to date from the 4th century.
From the Late Antique plainer shapes for vessels appear, concentrating on showing the natural patterns of figured stones - survivals of these are hard to date, and mostly have survived in church treasuries with medieval mounts in goldsmith work. The best collection of Byzantine liturgical vessels is in the Treasury of San Marco, Venice, some of them booty from the Fourth Crusade. Byzantine artists maintained a tradition throughout the Middle Ages, often working in clear rock crystal. There are a few large pieces from Carolingian art, including the Lothair Crystal, and then a continuing tradition of rock crystal work, often used undecorated in reliquaries and other pieces in the same way as modern glass, for which they are often mistaken by modern viewers. By the end of the Middle Ages a wider variety of stones and objects are seen, used for both religious objects and secular ones.
The Opificio delle pietre dure ("Hardstone workshop") founded by the Medici in Florence in 1588 soon became the leading workshop in Europe, and developed the pietra dura style of multi-coloured inlays, which use coloured marbles as well as gemstones. They also produced vessels and small sculptures from a single piece of stone, often mounted with gold, which was also a speciality of Milanese workshops. Other rulers followed their example, including Peter the Great, whose Peterhof Lapidary Works, founded in 1721, began the passion among Russian royalty and aristocrats for hardstones. Engraved gem production had already revived, centred on Venice but with artists in many countries, and gems of very high quality continued to be produced until the mid-19th century. The Mannerist court taste of the 16th century delighted in extravagant vessels for serving fruit or sweetmeats, or display as table centrepieces or on sideboards, with hardstones augmented with mounts and bases in precious metal, enamel and jewels. One collection that has remained mostly together is the "Dauphin's Treasure" of Louis, Dauphin of France (1661–1711), which passed to his son Philip V of Spain; over 120 objects are now displayed together in the Museo del Prado, many of which were already over a century old in the Dauphin's lifetime.
In contrast to the vast malachite vases that rather typify Russian carving (picture below), the last notable modern producer was Fabergé in pre-Revolutionary Russia. Before he produced the famous Imperial Easter Eggs he made his reputation with small hardstone figures of animals and people, typically only 25–75mm long or wide, and small vases with a few flowers—the vase and "water" in rock crystal and the flowers in various hardstones and enamel.
Pre-Columbian and other traditions
Beyond the Old World, hardstone carving was important in various Pre-Columbian cultures, including jade in Mesoamerica and obsidian in Mesoamerica. Because its colour had associations with water and vegetation, jade was also a symbol of life to many cultures; the Maya placed jade beads in the mouths of the dead. Lacking iron, jade was the hardest material the Pre-Columbians were able to work with, apart from emery.
A particular type of object running through the long history of Mesoamerican cultures from the Olmec to the Maya and Aztec is the face "mask" in semi-precious stone (they do not seem to have been for actually wearing), either carved from a single piece or of pieces inlaid on a backing of another material. Curators refer to "Olmec-style" face masks as despite being Olmec in style, to date no example has been recovered in a controlled archaeological Olmec context. However they have been recovered from sites of other cultures, including one deliberately deposited in the ceremonial precinct of Tenochtitlan (Mexico City), which would presumably have been about 2,000 years old when the Aztecs buried it, suggesting these were valued and collected as Roman antiquities were in Europe. The Aztecs' own masks are more typically of turquoise inlay, the Mayans' of jade inlay (see gallery).
Another supposed type of Pre-Columbian hardstone carving is the rock crystal skull; however experts are now satisfied that all known large (life-size) examples are 19th-century forgeries, though some miniature ones may be genuinely Pre-Columbian.
The Māori people of New Zealand, developed the carving of pounamu (jade) for weapons, tools and ornaments to a high standard.
Techniques
Most hardstones, including jade and quartz varieties, have a crystalline structure that does not allow detailed carving by edged tools without great wastage and a poor finish. Working them has always been very time-consuming, which together with the cost of rare materials often traded from very far away, has accounted for the great expense of these objects. After sawing and perhaps chiselling to reach the approximate shape, stones were mostly cut by using abrasive powder from harder stones in conjunction with a hand-drill, probably often set in a lathe, and by grinding-wheels. Emery has been mined for abrasive powder on Naxos since antiquity, and was known in Pre-Columbian Mesoamerica. Some early types of seal were cut by hand, rather than a drill, which does not allow fine detail. There is no evidence that magnifying lenses were used by cutters in antiquity. The Chinese sometimes tipped their straight drills with less-valued diamonds.
A medieval guide to gem-carving techniques survives from Theophilus Presbyter. Byzantine cutters used a flat-edged wheel on a drill for intaglio work, while Carolingian ones used round-tipped drills; it is unclear how they learned this technique. Mughal carvers also used drills. Inlay sections could be sawed by bow saws. In intaglio gems at least, the recessed cut surface is usually very well preserved, and microscopic examination is revealing of the technique used. The colour of several gemstones can be enhanced by a number of artificial methods, using heat, sugar and dyes. Many of these can be shown to have been used since antiquity — since the 7th millennium BC in the case of heating.
Imitations
As a highly prestigious artform using expensive materials, many different techniques for imitating hardstone carvings have been developed, some of which have themselves created significant artistic traditions. Celadon ware, with a jade coloured glaze, was important in China and Korea, and in early periods used for shapes typical of jade objects. Roman cameo glass was invented to imitate cameo gems, with the advantage that consistent layers were possible even in objects in the round. The small group of 11th(?)-century Hedwig glasses are inspired by Fatimid rock-crystal vessels, and from the 18th century chandeliers in cut glass drew from fantastically expensive rock crystal ones made for the court of Louis XIV. In the Italian Renaissance agate glass was perfected to imitate agate vessels with multicoloured figuration.
Ceramics have often been decorated to imitate gemstones, and wood, plaster and other materials painted to imitate stones. Scagliola developed in Italy to imitate pietra dura inlays on plaster; less elaborate forms are called marbleizing. Medieval illuminated manuscripts often imitated both inlaid stone and engraved gems, and after printing took over paper marbling continued as a manual craft for decorating end-papers and covers.
Gallery

Hardwood is wood from flowering (angiosperm) trees. These are usually found in broad-leaved temperate and tropical forests. In temperate and boreal latitudes, they are mostly deciduous, but in the tropics and subtropics, they are mostly evergreen. Hardwood (which comes from angiosperm trees) contrasts with softwood (which is from gymnosperm trees).
Characteristics
Hardwoods are produced by angiosperm trees that reproduce by flowers, and have broad leaves. Many species are deciduous. Those of temperate regions lose their leaves every autumn as temperatures fall and are dormant in the winter, but those of tropical regions may shed their leaves in response to seasonal or sporadic periods of drought. Hardwood from deciduous species, such as oak, normally shows annual growth rings, but these may be absent in some tropical hardwoods.
Hardwoods have a more complex structure than softwoods and are often much slower growing as a result. The dominant feature separating "hardwoods" from softwoods is the presence of pores, or vessels. The vessels may show considerable variation in size, shape of perforation plates (simple, scalariform, reticulate, foraminate), and structure of cell wall, such as spiral thickenings. Several specific microscopic features are used in the identification process of a hardwood species.
As the name suggests, the wood from these trees is generally harder than that of softwoods, but there are significant exceptions. In both groups there is an enormous variation in actual wood hardness, with the range in density in hardwoods completely including that of softwoods; some hardwoods (e.g., balsa) are softer than most softwoods, while yew is an example of a hard softwood.
Chemistry
The structural polymers of hardwoods are cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. The constituents of hardwood lignin differs from those included in softwood. Sinapyl alcohol and coniferyl alcohol are the main monomers of hardwood lignin.
Hardwoods contain a smaller quantity of non-structural constituents, named extractives, than softwoods. These extractives are usually categorized into three broad groups: aliphatic compounds, terpenes and phenolic compounds. Aliphatic compounds found in hardwoods include fatty acids, fatty alcohols and their esters with glycerol, fatty alcohols (waxes) and sterols (steryl esters), hydrocarbons, such as alkanes, sterols, such as sitosterol, sitostanol and campesterol. The terpene content of the hardwood significantly differs from the softwood, and mainly consists of triterpenoids, polyprenols and other higher terpenes. Triterpenoids commonly purified from hardwoods include cycloartenol, betulin and squalene. Hardwood polyterpenes are rubber, gutta percha, gutta-balatá and betulaprenols. Although in small quantities, hardwoods also contain mono-, sesqui- and diterpenes, such as α- and β-pinenes, 3-carene, β-myrcene, limonene, hinokitiol, δ-cadinene, α- and δ-cadinols, borneol. Hardwood is rich in phenolic compounds, such as stilbenes, lignans, norlignans, tannins, flavonoids.
Applications
Hardwoods are employed in a large range of applications, including fuel, tools, construction, boat building, furniture making, musical instruments, flooring, cooking, barrels, and manufacture of charcoal. Solid hardwood joinery tends to be expensive compared to softwood. In the past, tropical hardwoods were easily available, but the supply of some species, such as Burma teak and mahogany, is now becoming scarce due to over-exploitation. Cheaper "hardwood" doors, for instance, now consist of a thin veneer bonded to a core of softwood, plywood or medium-density fibreboard (MDF). Hardwoods may be used in a variety of objects, but are most frequently seen in furniture or musical instruments because of their density which adds to durability, appearance, and performance. Different species of hardwood lend themselves to different end uses or construction processes. This is due to the variety of characteristics apparent in different timbers, including density, grain, pore size, growth and fibre pattern, flexibility and ability to be steam bent. For example, the interlocked grain of elm wood (Ulmus spp.) makes it suitable for the making of chair seats where the driving in of legs and other components can cause splitting in other woods.
Cooking
There is a correlation between density and calories/volume. This makes the denser hardwoods like oak, cherry, and apple more suited for camp fires, cooking fires, and smoking meat, as they tend to burn hotter and longer than softwoods like pine or cedar whose low-density construction and highly-flammable pitch make them burn quickly and without producing quite as much heat.

Harz granite (German: Harzer Granit, pronounced [ˌhaːɐ̯tsɐ gʁaˈniːt]) is found in the Harz Mountains of central Germany. It may be divided into five types, all of which were widely used as natural stone: Knaupsholz granite, Birkenkopf granite, Wurmberg granite, Königskopf granite and Ilsestein granite. The first three granites were widely used in North Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands and, later, also in East Germany. Knaupsholz granite was "for a long time one of the most important types of cut stone in the former GDR".
In 2009 only Knaupsholz granite was still being quarried.
Geology
The granitic plutons of the Harz Mountains - the Brocken, Ramberg and Oker plutons - were formed at the end of the Harz mountain building period (the Hercynian orogeny) during the Late Carboniferous about 300 million years ago. These natural stones were formed when large magma intrusions in the Brocken granite massif solidified at different cooling and crystallization rates into several differently coloured granites. The Harz granites are part of the Brocken granite complex, which is the largest granite complex in the Harz with an area of 165 square kilometres (64 sq mi). The Harzburg gabbro-norite intrusion forms part of this complex, but has a primary chemistry similar to an island-arc tholeiite, although it shows the effects of large scale assimilation of crustal rocks.
Quarries
Among the large quarrying concerns operating before the Second World War in 1938 were the firms of Zureck in Wernigerode (100 to 110 employees), Hannoversche Basaltwerke mbH with its branch, the Wernigerode Granite Quarries (Granitsteinbrüche Wernigerode, 60 to 70 employees), and Braunlager Granit- und Schotterwerke G.m.b.H. (45 employees). There were also 5 to 7 medium and 15 to 17 small businesses with a combined total of 600 employees. Their market at that time comprised the entire territory of the German Reich, Belgium and the Netherlands.
In 1948, after the war, 30 to 40 quarrymen were working in the Braunlager Granit- und Schotterwerken as well as an unknown number in another firm in Lower Saxony. There are no exact figures for the numbers of workers in the firms of the German Democratic Republic (GDR). The Knaupsholz and Birkenkopf quarries in the GDR and the divisions of the Zureck company in Wernigerode were expropriated on 5 November 1945.
In the early 1950s, the following quarries in the Brocken granite region were listed by Sickenberg (1951): Eckerloch, Schneeloch, Gebbertsberg, Wurmberg, Haserode, Wolfklippen, Großer und Kleiner Birkenkopf, Knaupsholz, Ottofels, Neustätter Hau, Forsthaus Plessenburg and Gelochter Stein. In 1958, eight quarries were still being worked in the territory of the GDR, but only two were left in 1969 (Knaupsholz and Birkenkopf).
Knaupsholz granite
Occurrence
Knaupsholz granite was quarried in the Knaupsholz forest district near the small settlements of Drei Annen Hohne and Schierke, a kilometre east of Schierke station in Saxony-Anhalt. Knaupsholz granite was one of the most important building stones in East Germany.
Mineral content
Knaupsholz granite is grey-red in colour and coarse-grained. It contains 33.5% quartz, 45.9% alkali feldspar, 15.1% plagioclase feldspar, 4.8% biotite and chlorite, 0.7% ore minerals, like magnetite, pyrite, hematite, and 0.7 others. The alkali feldspar crystals can be up to 18 mm across.
Birkenkopf granite
Occurrence
Birkenkopf granite was quarried on the Großer Birkenkopf hill south of Hasselfelde. It is a medium-grained granite with blue-grey coloration. In the quarry 30 to 40% blocks of stone could be used for sawing and 50% of exploitable rock debris could be obtained. The quarry closed in 2009.
Mineral composition
Birkenkopf granite contains 31.3% quartz, 42.6% alkali feldspar, 20.4% plagioclase feldspar, 5.4% biotite and chlorite as well as 0.3% ore minerals like magnetite, pyrite and hematite.
Wurmberg granite
Occurrence
The quarry for Wurmberg granite was situated about 2.5 kilometres north of Braunlage and 250 metres high on the Wurmberg mountain. The granite was pale red and fine to coarse-grained. The quarry has been closed since spring 1974.
Mineral composition
This granite contains 31% quartz, 42% alkali feldspar, 20% plagioclase feldspar, 7% biotite, as well as less than 1% of other minerals like zircon, apatite, rutile, muscovite and opaque minerals.
Königskopf granite
Occurrence
Königskopf granite was extracted in a quarry near Königskrug, which closed in the 1960s. As a result of ecological restrictions it is unlikely to be reopened again. The granite is light red to intense red (flesh red) in colour.
Mineral composition
Königskopf granite contains 33% quartz, 42% orthoclase with a mineral grain size of 2 to 5 mm up to a maximum of 15 mm, 22% plagioclase feldspar, 5% biotite and 0.7% other minerals.
Ilsestein granite
Ilsestein granite was quarried on the northern boundary of the Harz on the Kleiner Birkenkopf hill near Thale. It was only of local significance, because it had low hardness.
Geology and occurrence
Ilsestein granite lies on the northern perimeter of the Harz and is part of the Brocken massif. It occurs in a vein-like deposit, 11 kilometres long and 2 kilometres wide. The magma of the Ilsestein granite was probably the last magma intrusion in the Brocken complex. It is the most quartz-rich granite in the Brocken complex. Its quartz and orthoclase elements grew together. Its utility and hardness as a construction stone is reduced by the numerous geodes, up to 5 cm across.
Use
Harz granites are weather-resistant, polishable and resistant to aggressive, chemical compounds. Their technical properties make them very suitable for outdoor use, but they are also used indoors due to their appearance.
These granites are used as solid building stones for bridge construction, walls, door lintels and window sills, staircase steps, flags, façades, gravestones and, as cobbles and hard core, for roads. Knaupsholz granite is used as stone chippings for trails in the Harz National Park. In 2009, the remaining quarries at Knaupsholz and Birkenkopf (now closed) were providing granite for the following purposes:
Technical construction
Road surfaces, cobbles, walls and bridges in Lower Saxony and North Germany, Magdeburg, Hamburg and Berlin; lock construction and bank reinforcement on the Mittelland and Kiel Canals.
Monuments and buildings
Harz granite has been used for monuments and memorials in Buchenwald, Ravensbrück and Sachsenhausen concentration camps; the Soviet War Memorial in Berlin's Tiergarten and the Soviet Cenotaph in Treptow; interior of the Schiller Museum in Weimar; the mining church in Schierke; the Palace of Culture of the GDR; the Deutsche Bank and town hall steps in Wernigerode.

The heat escape lessening position or heat escape lessening posture (HELP) is a human position to reduce heat loss while immersed in cold water.
Position
HELP is taught as part of the curriculum in Australia, North America, and Ireland for lifeguard and boating safety training. It involves positioning one's knees together and hugging them close to the chest using one's arms. Furthermore, groups of people can huddle together in this position to conserve body heat, offer moral support, and provide a larger target for rescuers.
The HELP is an attempt to reduce heat loss enough to lessen the effect of hypothermia. Hypothermia is a condition where bodily temperature drops too low to perform normal voluntary or involuntary functions. Cold water causes "immersion hypothermia", which can cause damage to extremities or the body's core, including unconsciousness or death.
The HELP reduces exposure of high heat loss areas of the body. Wearing a personal flotation device allows a person to draw their knees to their chest and arms to their sides, while still remaining able to breathe.
History
The HELP was coined by John Hayward in his publication of "Man in Cold Water: A Brief Presentation on Cold Water Safety" in 1973. In his research, Hayward found that the lateral thorax and groin were important regions in regard to body heat loss. Using HELP to cover these "thermovulnerable" body parts helps to extend survival time. Hayward found that by using the HELP, the rate of cooling of human bodies in cold water was reduced by about 1/3.

The Heimlich maneuver (spelled manoeuvre in British English), also known as an abdominal thrust, is a first-aid procedure used to treat upper-airway obstructions (or choking) by foreign objects. American doctor Henry Heimlich is often credited for its development. To perform a Heimlich maneuver, a rescuer stands behind a choking victim and uses their hands to apply pressure to the bottom of the victim's diaphragm. This compresses the lungs and exerts pressure on the object lodged in the trachea in an effort to expel it.
Most modern protocols, including those of the American Heart Association, American Red Cross, and European Resuscitation Council, recommend that treatment of airway obstructions be performed in several stages designed to apply increasing levels of pressure. Most protocols recommend encouraging the victim to cough, followed by hard back slaps, and finally abdominal thrusts or chest thrusts as a final resort. Some guidelines also recommend alternating between abdominal thrusts and back slaps.
History
Thoracic surgeon and medical researcher Henry Heimlich, noted for promulgating abdominal thrusts, claimed that back slaps were proven to cause death by lodging foreign objects into the windpipe. A 1982 Yale study by Day, DuBois, and Crelin that persuaded the American Heart Association to stop recommending back blows for dealing with choking was partially funded by Heimlich's own foundation. According to Dr. Roger White of the Mayo Clinic and American Heart Association (AHA), “There was never any science here. Heimlich overpowered science all along the way with his slick tactics and intimidation, and everyone, including us at the AHA, caved in.”
Henry Heimlich also promoted abdominal thrusts as a treatment for drowning and asthma attacks. The Red Cross now contests those claims. The Heimlich Institute has stopped advocating on their website for the Heimlich maneuver to be used as a first aid measure for drowning victims. Heimlich's son, Peter M. Heimlich, alleges that in August 1974 his father published the first of a series of fraudulent case reports in order to promote the use of abdominal thrusts for near-drowning rescue. The 2005 drowning rescue guidelines of the American Heart Association did not include citations of Heimlich's work, and warned against the use of the Heimlich maneuver for drowning rescue as unproven and dangerous, due to its risk of vomiting leading to aspiration.
In May 2016, Henry Heimlich, then age 96, claimed to have personally used the maneuver to save the life of a fellow resident at his retirement home in Cincinnati. It was alleged to be either the first or second time Heimlich himself used his namesake maneuver to save the life of someone in a non-simulated choking situation. According to Heimlich's son, Peter M. Heimlich, "both 'rescues' were bogus."
Universal sign of choking
A choking victim is usually unable to speak, and may not be able to make much sound. A universal sign of choking has been designated as a silent indication from a person who is unable to breathe, and consists of placing both hands on one's own throat while trying to attract the attention of others who might help.
Technique
Both the American Red Cross and UK National Health Service (NHS) advise that for a first attempt, a rescuer should encourage the patient to expel the obstruction by coughing. As a second measure, the rescuer should deliver five slaps to the back after bending the patient forward. Abdominal thrusts are recommended only if these methods fail.
The American Red Cross, the NHS, the European Resuscitation Council and the Mayo Clinic recommend a repeating cycle of five back slaps and five abdominal thrusts. They are not recommended on children below the age of one. In contrast to the prevailing American and European advice, the Australian Resuscitation Council recommends chest thrusts instead of abdominal thrusts.
To perform a Heimlich maneuver, a rescuer stands behind an upright patient, using the hands to exert forceful pressure on the bottom of the diaphragm. As an example, WebMD recommends making a fist with one hand and grasping the fist with the other in order to press with both just above the patient's navel. This compresses the lungs and exerts pressure on any object lodged in the trachea in an effort to expel it. The pressure amounts to an artificially induced cough. To assist a larger person, more force may be needed. The Mayo Clinic recommends the same placement of fist and hand, with upward thrusts as if the rescuer is attempting to lift the victim.
If the victim cannot receive pressure on the abdomen (for example, in case of pregnancy or excessive obesity), chest thrusts are advised. These are applied on the lower half of the chest bone, but not in the very endpoint (the xiphoid process, which could be broken).
For victims who are not in an upright position, The American National Institutes of Health recommends positioning the victim on the back, then straddling the torso and employing chest thrusts.
It is possible for conscious choking victims to perform the procedure on themselves, without assistance.
Because of the forceful nature of the procedure, even when performed correctly, abdominal thrusts can injure the victim. Bruising to the abdomen is highly likely and more serious injuries can occur, including fracture of the xiphoid process or ribs. The NHS recommends that victims subjected to abdominal thrusts should seek medical attention after the event.
Researchers at Royal Brompton Hospital have demonstrated that levels of intrathoracic pressures (50–60 cmH2O) exerted by inward abdominal thrusts are similar to those produced when the force is directed both inward and upward. The researchers argue that this may be easier to perform with less concern for injury to the rib cage or upper abdominal organs. Self-administered abdominal thrusts by study participants produced similar pressures to those generated by administering first aid. The highest pressures were produced by participants performing an abdominal thrust by pressing onto the back of a chair (115 cmH2O).

The Helwan retouch was a bifacial microlithic flint-tool fabrication technology characteristic of the Early Natufian culture in the Levant, a region in the Eastern Mediterranean (12,500 BP – 11,000 BP) such as the Harifian culture. The decline of the Helwan Retouch was largely replaced by the "backing" technique and coincided with the emergence of microburin methods, which involved snapping bladelets on an anvil. Natufian lithic technology throughout the usage of the Helwan Retouch was dominated by lunate-shaped lithics, such as picks and axes and especially sickles (which were predominantly—at least 80% of the time—used for harvesting wild cereals).

Hematite (), also spelled as haematite, is a common iron oxide compound with the formula Fe2O3 and is widely found in rocks and soils. Hematite crystals belong to the rhombohedral lattice system which is designated the alpha polymorph of Fe2O3. It has the same crystal structure as corundum (Al2O3) and ilmenite (FeTiO3). With this crystal structure geometry it forms a complete solid solution at temperatures above 950 °C (1,740 °F).
Hematite occurs naturally in black to steel or silver-gray, brown to reddish-brown, or red colors. It is mined as an important ore mineral of iron. It is electrically conductive. Hematite varieties include kidney ore, martite (pseudomorphs after magnetite), iron rose and specularite (specular hematite). While these forms vary, they all have a rust-red streak. Hematite is not only harder than pure iron, but also much more brittle. The term kidney ore may be broadly used to describe botryoidal, mammillary, or reniform hematite. Maghemite is a polymorph of hematite (γ-Fe2O3) with the same chemical formula, but with a spinel structure like magnetite.
Large deposits of hematite are found in banded iron formations. Gray hematite is typically found in places that have still, standing water, or mineral hot springs, such as those in Yellowstone National Park in North America. The mineral may precipitate in the water and collect in layers at the bottom of the lake, spring, or other standing water. Hematite can also occur in the absence of water, usually as the result of volcanic activity.
Clay-sized hematite crystals also may occur as a secondary mineral formed by weathering processes in soil, and along with other iron oxides or oxyhydroxides such as goethite, which is responsible for the red color of many tropical, ancient, or otherwise highly weathered soils.
Etymology and history
The name hematite is derived from the Greek word for blood, αἷμα (haima), due to the red coloration found in some varieties of hematite. The color of hematite is often used as a pigment. The English name of the stone is derived from Middle French hématite pierre, which was taken from Latin lapis haematites c. the 15th century, which originated from Ancient Greek αἱματίτης λίθος (haimatitēs lithos, "blood-red stone").
Ochre is a clay that is colored by varying amounts of hematite, varying between 20% and 70%. Red ochre contains unhydrated hematite, whereas yellow ochre contains hydrated hematite (Fe2O3 · H2O). The principal use of ochre is for tinting with a permanent color.
Use of the red chalk of this iron-oxide mineral in writing, drawing, and decoration is among the earliest in human history. To date, the earliest known human use of the powdery mineral is 164,000 years ago by the inhabitants of the Pinnacle Point caves in what now is South Africa, possibly for social purposes. Hematite residues are also found in graves from 80,000 years ago. Near Rydno in Poland and Lovas in Hungary red chalk mines have been found that are from 5000 BC, belonging to the Linear Pottery culture at the Upper Rhine.
Rich deposits of hematite have been found on the island of Elba that have been mined since the time of the Etruscans.
Underground hematite mining is classified as a carcinogenic hazard to humans.
Magnetism
Hematite shows only a very feeble response to a magnetic field. Unlike magnetite, it is not noticeably attracted to an ordinary magnet. Hematite is an antiferromagnetic material below the Morin transition at 250 K (−23 °C), and a canted antiferromagnet or weakly ferromagnetic above the Morin transition and below its Néel temperature at 948 K (675 °C), above which it is paramagnetic.
The magnetic structure of α-hematite was the subject of considerable discussion and debate during the 1950s, as it appeared to be ferromagnetic with a Curie temperature of approximately 1,000 K (730 °C), but with an extremely small magnetic moment (0.002 Bohr magnetons). Adding to the surprise was a transition with a decrease in temperature at around 260 K (−13 °C) to a phase with no net magnetic moment. It was shown that the system is essentially antiferromagnetic, but that the low symmetry of the cation sites allows spin–orbit coupling to cause canting of the moments when they are in the plane perpendicular to the c axis. The disappearance of the moment with a decrease in temperature at 260 K (−13 °C) is caused by a change in the anisotropy which causes the moments to align along the c axis. In this configuration, spin canting does not reduce the energy. The magnetic properties of bulk hematite differ from their nanoscale counterparts. For example, the Morin transition temperature of hematite decreases with a decrease in the particle size. The suppression of this transition has been observed in hematite nanoparticles and is attributed to the presence of impurities, water molecules and defects in the crystals lattice. Hematite is part of a complex solid solution oxyhydroxide system having various contents of H2O (water), hydroxyl groups and vacancy substitutions that affect the mineral's magnetic and crystal chemical properties. Two other end-members are referred to as protohematite and hydrohematite.
Enhanced magnetic coercivities for hematite have been achieved by dry-heating a two-line ferrihydrite precursor prepared from solution. Hematite exhibited temperature-dependent magnetic coercivity values ranging from 289 to 5,027 oersteds (23–400 kA/m). The origin of these high coercivity values has been interpreted as a consequence of the subparticle structure induced by the different particle and crystallite size growth rates at increasing annealing temperature. These differences in the growth rates are translated into a progressive development of a subparticle structure at the nanoscale (super small). At lower temperatures (350–600 °C), single particles crystallize. However, at higher temperatures (600–1000 °C), the growth of crystalline aggregates, and a subparticle structure is favored.
Mine tailings
Hematite is present in the waste tailings of iron mines. A recently developed process, magnetation, uses magnets to glean waste hematite from old mine tailings in Minnesota's vast Mesabi Range iron district. Falu red is a pigment used in traditional Swedish house paints. It is made from tailings of the Falun Mine.
Mars
The spectral signature of hematite was seen on the planet Mars by the infrared spectrometer on the NASA Mars Global Surveyor and 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft in orbit around Mars. The mineral was seen in abundance at two sites on the planet, the Terra Meridiani site, near the Martian equator at 0° longitude, and the Aram Chaos site near the Valles Marineris. Several other sites also showed hematite, such as Aureum Chaos. Because terrestrial hematite is typically a mineral formed in aqueous environments or by aqueous alteration, this detection was scientifically interesting enough that the second of the two Mars Exploration Rovers was sent to a site in the Terra Meridiani region designated Meridiani Planum. In-situ investigations by the Opportunity rover showed a significant amount of hematite, much of it in the form of small "Martian spherules" that were informally named "blueberries" by the science team. Analysis indicates that these spherules are apparently concretions formed from a water solution. "Knowing just how the hematite on Mars was formed will help us characterize the past environment and determine whether that environment was favorable for life".
Jewelry
Hematite is often shaped into beads, tumbling stones, and other jewellery components. Hematite was once used as mourning jewelry. Certain types of hematite- or iron-oxide-rich clay, especially Armenian bole, have been used in gilding. Hematite is also used in art such as in the creation of intaglio engraved gems. Hematine is a synthetic material sold as magnetic hematite.
Pigment
Hematite has been sourced to make pigments since earlier origins of human pictorial depictions, such as on cave linings and other surfaces, and has been employed continually in artwork through the eras. In Roman times, the pigment obtained by finely grinding hematite was known as sil atticum. Other names for the mineral when used in painting include colcotar and caput mortuum. In Spanish, it is called almagre or almagra, from the Arabic al-maghrah, red earth, which passed into English and Portuguese. Other ancient names for the pigment include ochra hispanica, sil atticum antiquorum, and Spanish brown. It forms the basis for red, purple, and brown iron-oxide pigments, as well as being an important component of ochre, sienna, and umber pigments. The main producer of hematite for the pigment industry is India, followed distantly by Spain.
Industrial purposes
As mentioned earlier, hematite is an important mineral for iron ore. The physical properties of hematite are also employed in the areas of medical equipment, shipping industries, and coal production. Having high density and capable as an effective barrier against X-ray passage, it often is incorporated into radiation shielding. As with other iron ores, it often is a component of ship ballasts because of its density and economy. In the coal industry, it can be formed into a high specific density solution, to help separate coal powder from impurities.
Gallery

A Hertzian cone is the cone produced when an object passes through a solid, such as a bullet through glass. More technically, it is a cone of force that propagates through a brittle, amorphous, or cryptocrystalline solid material from a point of impact. This force eventually removes a full or partial cone in the material. This is the physical principle that explains the form and characteristics of the flakes removed from a core of tool stone during the process of lithic reduction.
This phenomenon is named after the German physicist Heinrich Rudolf Hertz, who first described this type of wave-front propagation through various media.
Although it might not be agreed by all, natural phenomena which have been grouped with the Hertzian cone phenomena include the crescentic "chatter marks" made on smoothed bedrock by glacial ice dragging along boulders at its base, the numerous crescentic impact marks sometimes seen on pebbles and cobbles, and the shatter cones found at bolide impact sites. James Byous, working independently (at privately funded Dowd Research, Savannah, Georgia USA) has made a protracted study of Hertzian cones. Some of his work may be found via sharing points or directly at Dowd Research. He has produced a comprehensive glossary on Hertzian fractures and related terms. A Hertzian cone is often 104 degrees when created by an indenter. Smaller cones may be produced due to lack of size of the material, or irregularities in the structure of the material. However, in ballistics, the faster the projectile the steeper the edges and angle of the cone.

The hilt (rarely called a haft or shaft) is the handle of a knife, dagger, sword, or bayonet, consisting of a guard, grip, and pommel. The guard may contain a crossguard or quillons. A tassel or sword knot may be attached to the guard or pommel.
Pommel
The pommel (Anglo-Norman pomel "little apple") is an enlarged fitting at the top of the handle. They were originally developed to prevent the sword from slipping from the hand. From around the 11th century in Europe, they became heavy enough to be a counterweight to the blade. This gave the sword a point of balance not too far from the hilt, allowing a more fluid fighting style. Depending on sword design and swordsmanship style, the pommel may also be used to strike the opponent (e.g. using the Mordhau technique).
Pommels have appeared in a wide variety of shapes, including oblate spheroids, crescents, disks, wheels, and animal or bird heads. They are often engraved or inlayed with various designs and occasionally gilt and mounted with jewels.
Ewart Oakeshott introduced a system of classification of medieval pommel forms in his The Sword in the Age of Chivalry (1964) to stand alongside his blade typology. Oakeshott pommel types are enumerated with capital letters A–Z, with subtypes indicated by numerals.
Grip
The grip is the handle of the sword. It is usually made of wood or metal and often covered with shagreen (untanned tough leather or shark skin). Shark skin proved to be the most durable in temperate climates but deteriorates in hot climates. Consequently, rubber became popular in the latter half of the 19th century. Many sword types alternatively opt for ray skin, referred to in katana construction as same. Whatever material covers the grip, it is usually both glued on and wrapped with wire in a helix.
Guard
The guard is just above the grip. It is a common misconception that the cross-guard protects the wielder's entire hand from the opposing sword; only with the abandonment of the shield and then the armoured gauntlet did a full hand guard become necessary. The crossguard still protected the user from a blade that was deliberately slid down the length of the blade to cut off or injure the hand.
Early swords do not have true guards but simply a form of stop to prevent the hand slipping up the blade when thrusting, as they were invariably used in conjunction with a shield.
From the 11th century, European sword guards took the form of a straight crossbar (later called "quillon") perpendicular to the blade.
Beginning in the 16th century in Europe, guards became more and more elaborate, with additional loops and curved bars or branches to protect the hand. A single curved piece alongside the fingers (roughly parallel with the handle/blade and perpendicular to any crossguards) was referred to as a knuckle-bow.
Ultimately, the bars could be supplemented or replaced with metal plates that could be ornamentally pierced. The term "basket hilt" eventually came into vogue to describe such designs, and there are a variety of basket-hilted swords.
Simultaneously, emphasis upon the thrust attack with rapiers and smallswords revealed a vulnerability to thrusting. By the 17th century, guards were developed that incorporated a solid shield that surrounded the blade out to a diameter of up to two inches or more. Older forms of this guard retained the quillons or a single quillon, but later forms eliminated the quillons, altogether being referred to as a cup-hilt. This latter form is the basis of the guards of modern foils and épées.
Ricasso
The ricasso is a blunt section of blade just above the guard. On developed hilts it is protected by an extension of the guard. On two-handed swords, the ricasso provided a third hand position above the guard, permitting the user's hands to be placed further apart for better leverage while sacrificing the protection of the crossguard.
Sword knot
The sword knot or sword strap, sometimes called a tassel, is a lanyard—usually of leather but sometimes of woven gold or silver bullion, or more often metallic lace—looped around the hand to prevent the sword being lost if it is dropped. Although they have a practical function, sword knots often had a decorative design. For example, the British Army generally adopted a white leather strap with a large acorn knot made out of gold wire for infantry officers at the end of the 19th century. Such acorn forms of tassels were called 'boxed', which was the way of securing the fringe of the tassel along its bottom line such that the strands could not separate and become entangled or lost. Many sword knots were also made of silk with a fine, ornamental alloy gold or silver metal wire woven into it in a specified pattern.
The art and history of tassels are known by its French name, passementerie, or Posamenten as it was called in German. The military output of the artisans called passementiers (ornamental braid, lace, cord, or trimmings makers) is evident in catalogs of various military uniform and regalia makers of centuries past. The broader art form of passementerie, with its divisions of decor, clergy and nobility, upholstery, coaches and livery, and military, is covered in a few books on that subject, none of which are in English.
Indian swords had the tassel attached through an eyelet at the end of the pommel.
Chinese swords, both jian and dao, often have lanyards or tassels attached. As with Western sword knots, these serve both decorative and practical functions, and the manipulation of the tassel is a part of some jian performances.

The Holt-Dern process is a method by which silver and gold can be extracted from low-grade ores.
The method was applied in mining at Park City, Utah, and in the Tintic Mining District at the Tintic Smelter Site. It was named for George Dern and T.P. Holt.

Hornfels is an unusual and relatively rare stone used in making flaked stone tools, and which is found in Aboriginal archaeological sites in Victoria, Australia. A sample of places where it has been found can be seen in the geographic section below.
The term has been used for ...a group of compact, fine-grained, metamorphic rocks that form as a result of contact between sedimentary country rocks and a magma intrusion. The mineral composition is variable, but commonly contains mica and pyroxene while porphyroblasts of pyroxene, cordierite or andulusite also develop. Sedimentary structures are rarely evident due to a high degree of recrystallisation.

Hudbay Minerals Inc. is a Canadian mining company that produces copper, gold, silver, zinc, and molybdenum. In 2024, the company produced 137,943 tonnes of copper, 332,240 ounces of gold, 3,983,851 ounces of silver, 33,339 tonnes of zinc, and 1,323 tonnes of molybdenum. In 2024, copper sales represented 57% of revenue, gold sales represented 33% of revenue, and zinc sales represented 4% of revenue.
The company's major producing operations are the Constancia mine in Cusco, Peru; the Snow Lake operations in Snow Lake, Manitoba, Canada; and the Copper Mountain mine in British Columbia, Canada. The Company’s pipeline includes the Copper World project in Arizona, United States; the Mason project in Nevada, United States, and the Llaguen project in La Libertad, Peru. It also owns Rosemont Copper, a proposed large open pit copper mine project, which currently cannot be legally developed as it faces opposition from environmental groups on issues related to waste disposal, pollution, water contamination, and habitat destruction.
History
Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Co.
The Flin Flon greenstone belt was discovered by David Collins, a local trapper, and shown to prospector Tom Creighton in 1915. It was named after Josiah Flintabbatey Flonatin, a character in The Sunless City. The first claim was registered in 1915.
In 1925, after unsuccessful attempts to develop the mine, Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney (a member of the Whitney family of New York), along with Newmont Mining and Mining Corp of Canada, founded Hudson Bay Mining & Smelting (HBM&S), which acquired the Flin Flon property. The huge, high grade ore body required large amounts of hydro energy, was isolated, and copper production required a smelter, leading to delays in production. In June 1930, the mine, smelter, hydroelectric dam and railroad finally went into operation. In 1938, the company was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. The company supplied the United States with metals during World War II. In 1958, Hudbay opened its first mine in Snow Lake, 215 kilometres east of Flin Flon. Six years later, production began at Stall Lake Mine. In the 1960s, Anglo American plc, a South African mining company, invested in the company.
In the area near Flin Flon, the company started production at Anderson Lake in 1970 and discovered the Trout Lake deposit in 1974, which began production in 1982. It opened a concentrator at Snow Lake in 1979. In 1987, it discovered the Chisel North mine, which began production in 2001. In 1992, Hudbay closed its original Flin Flon mine; however, that same year, as a result of underground exploration, Hudbay discovered a substantial orebody that became its flagship 777 mine in Flin Flon; it went into development in 1999.
Hudbay Minerals
On December 21, 2004, OntZinc Corporation (formerly known as Pan American Resources) acquired HBM&S from Anglo American plc for C$316 million in cash and stock. The company was then renamed HudBay Minerals and was listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
In 2007, Hudbay located a significant zinc deposit near Snow Lake that became known as Lalor. The deposit also contained a large volume of gold, enough to support its own mine. Production began in 2012 and the mine officially opened in September 2014.
In August 2008, Hudbay acquired Skye Resources, owner of the Fenix Nickel Project in Guatemala, a substantial brownfield lateritic nickel mine and process plant that has been on care and maintenance since 1980, for US$460 million. Sky Resources was sold to Solway Group in 2011 for US$170 million.
In late 2008, the company entered into a merger agreement with Lundin Mining; at the time, Hudbay owned 20% of Lundin Mining. However, the proposed transaction failed to receive investor support due to the 2008 financial crisis and was terminated in February 2009; Hudbay sold its stake in Lundin in May 2009.
In 2008, shortly after the Lalor deposit discovery, the corporate head office was relocated to Toronto, Ontario from Winnipeg, Manitoba.
In early 2009, Hudbay Minerals suspended operations except maintenance at the Chisel North Mine in Snow Lake, Manitoba due to falling zinc metal prices and increased costs. Operations were restarted in 2010.
In March 2011, Hudbay acquired Norsemont Mining and its Constancia copper mine in Peru for C$520 million. Construction on the mine began in August 2012 at a projected cost of $1.5 billion and commercial production commenced in April 2015.
In June 2014, Hudbay acquired Augusta Resource Corporation, owner of the proposed Rosemont Copper project in Arizona, for $555 million. In 2017, Hudbay received the permits necessary to build and operate the mine; however, these permits were overturned by a court in 2019 and that decision was affirmed in an appeal in 2022. The project faced opposition due to possible pollution, water damage, and habitat destruction. to the Supreme Court. The ruling affects other potential mines in the Ninth Circuit that may seek to dispose of waste on public lands under color of the 1872 Mining Law. Instead, Hudbay focused on the nearby Copper World project, discovered in 2021 and on private lands.
In April 2015, Hudbay acquired the Snow Lake gold mine and mill, formerly New Britannia, from QMX Gold for US$12.3 million.
In January 2018, Hudbay acquired mining properties near its Constancia mine in southern Peru.
In December 2018, the company acquired Mason Resources, owner of the Ann Mason project in Nevada.
In February 2019, the company announced a C$124 million refurbishment at the Lalor mine to double production and extend its useful life.
In March 2019, Hudbay extended the life of its 777 mine to 2022.
On February 18, 2020, the community of Chilloroya formally approved a surface rights agreement with Hudbay for the Pampacancha satellite deposit located near the Constancia mine in Peru.
In September 2022, Hudbay closed the 777 mine, along with all production operations in Flin Flon.
In September 2023, Hudbay acquired Rockcliff Metals, with operations in the Snow Lake area of central Manitoba, for C$18 million.
In January 2025, the company sought approval for a $210 million expansion of its Constancia copper mine in Peru. Also in January 2025, the company increased its ownership of Arizona Sonoran Copper Company to 9.99% with a C$20 million investment.
In January 2025, the company received permits and for its Copper World project in Arizona. In April 2025, it received support from labor unions for the project.
In March 2025, the company acquired Mitsubishi Materials' 25% stake in the Copper Mountain mine for $44.25 million, increasing its ownership in the mine to 100%.
In May 2025, the company sold its Tartan West project to Canadian Gold.
Controversies
Environmental issues
In 2025, the company was criticized after 8,600 litres of waste was released in a month from the company's Copper Mountain mine near Princeton, British Columbia. The company said that there was no danger from the spills.
In 2025, the company was sued to stop its plans for transporting mining waste across protected Arizona State Trust Land.
Fatality at Lalor mine
In June 2021, operations at the Lalor mine were temporarily suspended after a fatality when a worker fell from a high distance.
Murders and rapes at former Guatemalan operations
The Fenix Nickel Project in Guatemala was 98.2% owned by Hudbay Minerals from August 2008 to September 2011.
In early January 2007, at least five Mayan communities were forcibly displaced from their lands. Dozens of houses were burnt to the ground. As part of the evictions, 13 Mayan women claimed that they were gang raped in Lote Ocho.
In 2010, a $12 million lawsuit filed in Canada against Hudbay alleged that on September 27, 2009, security personnel employed at the Fenix mine surrounded, beat, and hacked at Adolfo Ich Chamán, a Mayan community leader who was fighting efforts to evict villagers, with machetes, then shot him in the head at close range in an unprovoked attack. German Chub Choc was shot and paralyzed from the waist down. An arrest warrant was issued for the Head of Security at the Fenix mine. He spent four and a half years in prison before being acquitted in a trial in 2017. The 2017 verdict was overturned on appeal and he subsequently pleaded guilty in January 2021 and was convicted of the murder, but faced no further jail time.
In June 2013, the Ontario Superior Court of Justice ruled that Hudbay could be legally responsible for the crimes committed in Guatemala. A jury notice was filed in December 2013.
In October 2024, the civil lawsuits regarding the rapes of the Mayan women, the 2009 killing of Adolfo Ich Chamán, the 2009 shooting and paralysis of German Chub Choc were all settled; compensation was paid to the plaintiffs. Hudbay was represented by Fasken and the lawsuits were "settled without admission of liability by the defendants and with the acknowledgement that the parties continue to have fundamentally differing views on the facts underlying the allegations".

Hunting is the human practice of seeking, pursuing, capturing, and killing wildlife or feral animals. The most common reasons for humans to hunt are to obtain the animal's body for meat and useful animal products (fur/hide, bone/tusks, horn/antler, etc.), for recreation/taxidermy (see trophy hunting), although it may also be done for resourceful reasons such as removing predators dangerous to humans or domestic animals (e.g. wolf hunting), to eliminate pests and nuisance animals that damage crops/livestock/poultry or spread diseases (see varminting), for trade/tourism (see safari), or for ecological conservation against overpopulation and invasive species (commonly called a cull).
Recreationally hunted species are generally referred to as the game, and are usually mammals and birds. A person participating in a hunt is a hunter or (less commonly) huntsman; a natural area used for hunting is called a game reserve; and an experienced hunter who helps organise a hunt and/or manage the game reserve is also known as a gamekeeper.
Hunting activities by humans arose in Homo erectus or earlier, in the order of millions of years ago. Hunting has become deeply embedded in various human cultures and was once an important part of rural economies—classified by economists as part of primary production alongside forestry, agriculture, and fishery. Modern regulations (see game law) distinguish lawful hunting activities from illegal poaching, which involves the unauthorised and unregulated killing, trapping, or capture of animals.
Apart from food provision, hunting can be a means of population control. Hunting advocates state that regulated hunting can be a necessary component of modern wildlife management, for example to help maintain a healthy proportion of animal populations within an environment's ecological carrying capacity when natural checks such as natural predators are absent or insufficient, or to provide funding for breeding programs and maintenance of natural reserves and conservation parks. However, excessive hunting has also heavily contributed to the endangerment, extirpation and extinction of many animals. Some animal rights and anti-hunting activists regard hunting as a cruel, perverse and unnecessary blood sport. Certain hunting practices, such as canned hunts and trophy tours (especially to poor countries), are considered unethical and exploitative even by some hunters.
Marine mammals such as whales and pinnipeds are also targets of hunting, both recreationally and commercially, often with heated controversies regarding the morality, ethics and legality of such practices. The pursuit, harvesting or catch and release of fish and aquatic cephalopods and crustaceans is called fishing, which however is widely accepted and not commonly categorised as a form of hunting. It is also not considered hunting to pursue animals without intent to kill them, as in wildlife photography, birdwatching, or scientific-research activities which involve tranquilizing or tagging of animals, although green hunting is still called so. The practices of netting or trapping insects and other arthropods for trophy collection, or the foraging or gathering of plants and mushrooms, are also not regarded as hunting.
Skillful tracking and acquisition of an elusive target has caused the word hunt to be used in the vernacular as a metaphor for searching and obtaining something, as in "treasure hunting", "bargain hunting", "hunting for votes" and even "hunting down" corruption and waste.
Etymology
The word hunt serves as both a noun ("the act, the practice, or an instance of hunting") and a verb ("to pursue for food or in sport"). The noun has been dated to the early 12th century, from the verb hunt. Old English had huntung, huntoþ. The meaning of "a body of persons associated for the purpose of hunting with a pack of hounds" is first recorded in the 1570s. "The act of searching for someone or something" is from about 1600.
The verb, Old English huntian "to chase game" (transitive and intransitive), perhaps developed from hunta "hunter," is related to hentan "to seize," from Proto-Germanic huntojan (the source also of Gothic hinþan "to seize, capture," Old High German hunda "booty"), which is of uncertain origin. The general sense of "search diligently" (for anything) is first recorded c. 1200.
Types
Recreational hunting, also known as trophy hunting, sport hunting or "sporting"
Big game hunting
Big Five game (lion, elephant, African buffalo, African leopard, black rhinoceros)
Bear hunting
Bison hunting
Boar hunting
Tiger hunting
Reindeer and caribou hunting
Deer hunting/stalking
Elk hunting
Medium/small game hunting
Fox hunting
Mink hunting
Coon hunting
Hare coursing
Squirrel hunting
Fowling
Waterfowl hunting
Shorebird hunting (snipe, woodcock, curlew, sandpiper, plover)
Upland hunting (quail, pheasant, dove, grouse, turkey)
Pest control/nuisance management
Predator hunting
Wolf hunting
Jackal coursing
Coyote hunting
Bobcat hunting
Varmint hunting
Rabbiting
Rook shooting
Culling
Commercial hunting and traditional sustenance hunting
Seal hunting
Whaling, dolphin drive, dugong hunting
Alligator hunting
Kangaroo hunting
Other
Falconry
Green hunting
Poaching
Trapping
History
Lower to Middle Paleolithic
Hunting has a long history. It predates the emergence of Homo sapiens (anatomically modern humans) and may even predate the genus Homo.
The oldest undisputed evidence for hunting dates to the Early Pleistocene, consistent with the emergence and early dispersal of Homo erectus about 1.7 million years ago (Acheulean).
While it is undisputed that Homo erectus were hunters, the importance of this for the emergence of Homo erectus from its australopithecine ancestors, including the production of stone tools and eventually the control of fire, is emphasised in the so-called "hunting hypothesis" and de-emphasised in scenarios that stress omnivory and social interaction.
There is no direct evidence for hunting predating Homo erectus, in either Homo habilis or in Australopithecus.
The early hominid ancestors of humans were probably frugivores or omnivores, with a partially carnivorous diet from scavenging rather than hunting.
Evidence for australopithecine meat consumption was presented in the 1990s.
It has nevertheless often been assumed that at least occasional hunting behaviour may have been present well before the emergence of Homo.This can be argued on the basis of comparison with chimpanzees, the closest extant relatives of humans, who also engage in hunting, indicating that the behavioural trait may have been present in the Chimpanzee–human last common ancestor as early as 5 million years ago. The common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) regularly engages in troop predation behaviour, where bands of beta males are led by an alpha male. Bonobos (Pan paniscus) have also been observed to occasionally engage in group hunting, although more rarely than Pan troglodytes, mainly subsisting on a frugivorous diet.
Indirect evidence for Oldowan era hunting, by early Homo or late Australopithecus, has been presented in a 2009 study based on
an Oldowan site in southwestern Kenya.
Louis Binford (1986) criticised the idea that early hominids and early humans were hunters. On the basis of the analysis of the skeletal remains of the consumed animals, he concluded that hominids and early humans were mostly scavengers, not hunters,
Blumenschine (1986) proposed the idea of confrontational scavenging, which involves challenging and scaring off other predators after they have made a kill, which he suggests could have been the leading method of obtaining protein-rich meat by early humans.
Stone spearheads dated as early as 500,000 years ago were found in South Africa. Wood does not preserve well, however, and Craig Stanford, a primatologist and professor of anthropology at the University of Southern California, has suggested that the discovery of spear use by chimpanzees probably means that early humans used wooden spears as well, perhaps, five million years ago.
The earliest dated find of surviving wooden hunting spears dates to the very end of the Lower Paleolithic, about 300,000 years ago. The Schöningen spears, found in 1976 in Germany, are associated with Homo heidelbergensis.
The hunting hypothesis sees the emergence of behavioral modernity in the Middle Paleolithic as directly related to hunting, including mating behaviour, the establishment of language, culture, and religion, mythology and animal sacrifice. Sociologist David Nibert of Wittenberg University argues that the emergence of the organized hunting of animals undermined the communal, egalitarian nature of early human societies, with the status of women and less powerful males declining as the status of men quickly became associated with their success at hunting, which also increased human violence within these societies. However, 9000-year-old remains of a female hunter along with a toolkit of projectile points and animal processing implements were discovered at the Andean site of Wilamaya Patjxa, Puno District in Peru.
Early humans progressively invented tools and techniques for trapping animals. The earliest spears were crafted from wood, with tips toughened by burning. By 15,000 BC, hunters employed wooden and bone spear-launchers to enhance force and distance. These devices were frequently adorned with carvings of creatures.
Upper Paleolithic to Mesolithic
Evidence exists that hunting may have been one of the multiple, or possibly main, environmental factors leading to the Holocene extinction of megafauna and their replacement by smaller herbivores.
Humans are thought to have played a very significant role in the extinction of the Australian megafauna that was widespread prior to human occupation.
Hunting was a crucial component of hunter-gatherer societies before the domestication of livestock and the dawn of agriculture, beginning about 11,000 years ago in some parts of the world. In addition to the spear, hunting weapons developed during the Upper Paleolithic include the atlatl (a spear-thrower; before 30,000 years ago) and the bow (18,000 years ago). By the Mesolithic, hunting strategies had diversified with the development of these more far-reaching weapons and the domestication of the dog about 15,000 years ago. Evidence puts the earliest known mammoth hunting in Asia with spears to approximately 16,200 years ago.
Many species of animals have been hunted throughout history. One theory is that in North America and Eurasia, caribou and wild reindeer "may well be the species of single greatest importance in the entire anthropological literature on hunting" (see also Reindeer Age), although the varying importance of different species depended on the geographic location.
Mesolithic hunter-gathering lifestyles remained prevalent in some parts of the Americas, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Siberia, as well as all of Australia, until the European Age of Discovery. They still persist in some tribal societies, albeit in rapid decline. Peoples that preserved Paleolithic hunting-gathering until the recent past include some indigenous peoples of the Amazonas (Aché), some Central and Southern African (San people), some peoples of New Guinea (Fayu), the Mlabri of Thailand and Laos, the Vedda people of Sri Lanka, and a handful of uncontacted peoples. In Africa, one of the last remaining hunter-gatherer tribes are the Hadza of Tanzania.
Neolithic and Antiquity
Even as animal domestication became relatively widespread and after the development of agriculture, hunting usually remained a significant contributor to the human food-supply.
The supplementary meat and materials from hunting included protein, bone for implements, sinew for cordage, fur, feathers, rawhide and leather used in clothing.
Hunting is still vital in marginal climates, especially those unsuited for pastoral uses or for agriculture. For example, Inuit in the Arctic trap and hunt animals for clothing and use the skins of sea mammals to make kayaks, clothing, and footwear.
On ancient reliefs, especially from Mesopotamia, kings are often depicted by sculptors as hunters of big game such as lions and are often portrayed hunting from a war chariot - early examples of royalty symbolically and militaristically engaging in hunting
as "the sport of kings".
The cultural and psychological importance of hunting in ancient societies is represented by deities such as the horned god Cernunnos and lunar goddesses of classical antiquity, the Greek Artemis or Roman Diana. Taboos are often related to hunting, and mythological association of prey species with a divinity could be reflected in hunting restrictions such as a reserve surrounding a temple. Euripides' tale of Artemis and Actaeon, for example, may be seen as a caution against disrespect of prey or against impudent boasting.
With the domestication of the dog, birds of prey, and the ferret, various forms of animal-aided hunting developed, including venery (scent-hound hunting, such as fox hunting), coursing (sight-hound hunting), falconry, and ferreting. While these are all associated with medieval hunting, over time, various dog breeds were selected by humans for very precise tasks during the hunt, reflected in such names as "pointer" and "setter".
Pastoral and agricultural societies
Even as agriculture and animal husbandry became more prevalent, hunting often remained as a part of human culture where the environment and social conditions allowed. Hunter-gatherer societies persisted, even when increasingly confined to marginal areas. And within agricultural systems, hunting served to kill animals that prey upon domestic and wild animals or to attempt to extirpate animals seen by humans as competition for resources such as water or forage.
When hunting moved from a subsistence activity to a selective one, two trends emerged:
the development of the role of the specialist hunter, with special training and equipment
the option of hunting as a "sport" for members of an upper social class
The meaning of the word game in Middle English evolved to include an animal which is hunted. As the domestication of animals for meat grew, subsistence hunting remained among the lowest classes; however, the stylised pursuit of game in European societies became a luxury. Dangerous hunting, such as for lions or wild boars, often done on horseback or from a chariot, had a function similar to tournaments and manly sports. Hunting ranked as an honourable, somewhat competitive pastime to help the aristocracy practice skills of war in times of peace.
In most parts of medieval Europe, the upper class obtained the sole rights to hunt in certain areas of a feudal territory. Game in these areas was used as a source of food and furs, often provided via professional huntsmen, but it was also expected to provide a form of recreation for the aristocracy. The importance of this proprietary view of game can be seen in the Robin Hood legends, in which one of the primary charges against the outlaws is that they "hunt the King's deer". In contrast, settlers in Anglophone colonies gloried democratically in hunting for all.
In medieval Europe, hunting was considered by Johannes Scotus Eriugena to be part of the set of seven mechanical arts.
Use of dog
Although various other animals have been used to aid the hunter, such as ferrets, the dog has assumed many very important uses to the hunter.
The domestication of the dog has led to a symbiotic relationship in which the dog's independence from humans is deferred. Though dogs can survive independently of humans, and in many cases do ferally, when raised or adopted by humans the species tends to defer to its control in exchange for habitation, food and support.
Dogs today are used to find, chase, retrieve, and sometimes kill game. Dogs allow humans to pursue and kill prey that would otherwise be very difficult or dangerous to hunt. Different breeds of specifically bred hunting dog are used for different types of hunting. Waterfowl are commonly hunted using retrieving dogs such as the Labrador Retriever, the Golden Retriever, the Chesapeake Bay Retriever, the Brittany Spaniel, and other similar breeds. Game birds are flushed out using flushing spaniels such as the English Springer Spaniel, the various Cocker Spaniels and similar breeds.
The hunting of wild mammals in England and Wales with dogs was banned under the Hunting Act 2004. The wild mammals include fox, hare, deer and mink. There are, however, exceptions in the Act. Nevertheless, there have been numerous attempts on behalf of activists, pressure groups, etc. to revoke the act over the last two decades.
Religion
Many prehistoric deities are depicted as predators or prey of humans, often in a zoomorphic form, perhaps alluding to the importance of hunting for most Palaeolithic cultures.
In many pagan religions, specific rituals are conducted before or after a hunt; the rituals done may vary according to the species hunted or the season the hunt is taking place. Often a hunting ground, or the hunt for one or more species, was reserved or prohibited in the context of a temple cult. In Roman religion, Diana is the goddess of the hunt.
Indian and Eastern religions
Hindu scriptures describe hunting as an occupation, as well as a sport of the kingly. Even figures considered divine are described to have engaged in hunting. One of the names of the god Shiva is Mrigavyadha (deer-slayer). The word Mriga, in many Indian languages including Malayalam, not only stands for deer, but for all animals and animal instincts (Mriga Thrishna). Shiva, as Mrigavyadha, is the one who destroys the animal instincts in human beings. In the epic Ramayana, Dasharatha, the father of Rama, is said to have the ability to hunt in the dark. During one of his hunting expeditions, he accidentally killed Shravana, mistaking him for game. During Rama's exile in the forest, Ravana kidnapped his wife, Sita, from their hut, while Rama was asked by Sita to capture a golden deer, and his brother Lakshman went after him. According to the Mahabharat, Pandu, the father of the Pandavas, accidentally killed the sage Kindama and his wife with an arrow, mistaking them for a deer.
Jainism teaches followers to have tremendous respect for all of life. Prohibitions for hunting and meat eating are the fundamental conditions for being a Jain.
Buddhism's first precept is the respect for all sentient life. The general approach by all Buddhists is to avoid killing any living animals. Buddha explained the issue by saying "all fear death; comparing others with oneself, one should neither kill nor cause to kill."
In Sikhism, only meat obtained from hunting, or slaughtered with the Jhatka is permitted. The Sikh gurus, especially Guru Hargobind and Guru Gobind Singh were ardent hunters. Many old Sikh Rehatnamas like Prem Sumarag, recommend hunting wild boar and deer. However, among modern Sikhs, the practice of hunting has died down; some even saying that all meat is forbidden.
Christianity, Judaism, and Islam
From early Christian times, hunting has been forbidden to Roman Catholic Church clerics. Thus the Corpus Juris Canonici (C. ii, X, De cleric. venat.) says, "We forbid to all servants of God hunting and expeditions through the woods with hounds; and we also forbid them to keep hawks or falcons." The Fourth Council of the Lateran, held under Pope Innocent III, decreed (canon xv): "We interdict hunting or hawking to all clerics." The decree of the Council of Trent is worded more mildly: "Let clerics abstain from illicit hunting and hawking" (Sess. XXIV, De reform., c. xii), which seems to imply that not all hunting is illicit, and canonists generally make a distinction declaring noisy (clamorosa) hunting unlawful, but not quiet (quieta) hunting.
Ferraris gives it as the general sense of canonists that hunting is allowed to clerics if it be indulged in rarely and for sufficient cause, as necessity, utility or "honest" recreation, and with that moderation which is becoming to the ecclesiastical state. Ziegler, however, thinks that the interpretation of the canonists is not in accordance with the letter or spirit of the laws of the church.
Nevertheless, although a distinction between lawful and unlawful hunting is undoubtedly permissible, it is certain that a bishop can absolutely prohibit all hunting to the clerics of his diocese, as was done by synods at Milan, Avignon, Liège, Cologne, and elsewhere. Benedict XIV declared that such synodal decrees are not too severe, as an absolute prohibition of hunting is more conformable to the ecclesiastical law. In practice, therefore, the synodal statutes of various localities must be consulted to discover whether they allow quiet hunting or prohibit it altogether. Small-scale hunting as a family or subsistence farming activity is recognised by Pope Francis in his encyclical letter, Laudato si', as a legitimate and valuable aspect of employment within the food production system.
Hunting is not forbidden in Jewish law, although there is an aversion to it. The great 18th-century authority Rabbi Yechezkel Landau after a study concluded although "hunting would not be considered cruelty to animals insofar as the animal is generally killed quickly and not tortured... There is an unseemly element in it, namely cruelty." The other issue is that hunting can be dangerous and Judaism places an extreme emphasis on the value of human life.
Islamic Sharia Law permits hunting of lawful animals and birds if they cannot be easily caught and slaughtered. However, this is only for the purpose of food and not for trophy hunting.
National traditions
East Africa
A safari, from a Swahili word meaning "journey, expedition," especially in Africa, is defined as a journey to see or kill animals in their natural environment, most commonly in East Africa. Safari as a distinctive way of hunting was popularized by the US author Ernest Hemingway and President Theodore Roosevelt. A safari may consist of a several-days—or even weeks-long journey, with camping in the bush or jungle, while pursuing big game. Nowadays, it is often used to describe hunting tours through African wildlife.
Hunters are usually tourists, accompanied by licensed and highly regulated professional hunters, local guides, skinners, and porters in more difficult terrains. A special safari type is the solo-safari, where all the license acquiring, stalking, preparation, and outfitting is done by the hunter himself.
Indian subcontinent
During the feudal and colonial times in British India, hunting or shikar was regarded as a regal sport in the numerous princely states, as many maharajas and nawabs, as well as British officers, maintained a whole corps of shikaris (big-game hunters), who were native professional hunters. They would be headed by a master of the hunt, who might be styled mir-shikar. Often, they recruited the normally low-ranking local tribes because of their traditional knowledge of the environment and hunting techniques. Big game, such as Bengal tigers, might be hunted from the back of an Indian elephant.
Regional social norms are generally antagonistic to hunting, while a few sects, such as the Bishnoi, lay special emphasis on the conservation of particular species, such as the antelope. India's Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 bans the killing of all wild animals. However, the Chief Wildlife Warden may, if satisfied that any wild animal from a specified list has become dangerous to human life or is so disabled or diseased as to be beyond recovery, permit any person to hunt such an animal. In this case, the body of any wild animal killed or wounded becomes government property.
The practice among the soldiers in British India during the 1770s of going out to hunt snipes, a shorebird considered extremely challenging for hunters due to its alertness, camouflaging colour and erratic flight behavior, is believed to be the origin of the modern word for sniper, as snipe-hunters needed to be stealthy in addition to having tracking skills and marksmanship. The term was used in the nineteenth century, and had become common usage by the First World War.
United Kingdom
Unarmed fox hunting on horseback with hounds is the type of hunting most closely associated with the United Kingdom; in fact, "hunting" without qualification implies fox hunting. What in other countries is called "hunting" is called "shooting" (birds) or "stalking" (deer) in Britain. Fox hunting is a social activity for the upper classes, with roles strictly defined by wealth and status. Similar to fox hunting in many ways is the chasing of hares with hounds. Pairs of sighthounds (or long-dogs), such as greyhounds, may be used to pursue a hare in coursing, where the greyhounds are marked as to their skill in coursing the hare (but are not intended to actually catch it), or the hare may be pursued with scent hounds such as beagles or harriers. Other sorts of foxhounds may also be used for hunting stags (deer) or mink. Deer stalking with rifles is carried out on foot without hounds, using stealth.
These forms of hunting have been controversial in the UK. Animal welfare supporters believe that hunting causes unnecessary suffering to foxes, horses, and hounds. Proponents argue that the activity is a historical tradition. Using dogs to chase wild mammals was made illegal in February 2005 by the Hunting Act 2004; there were a number of exemptions (under which the activity may not be illegal) in the act for hunting with hounds, but no exemptions at all for hare-coursing.
Shooting traditions
Game birds, especially pheasants and red grouse, are shot with shotguns for sport in the UK; the British Association for Shooting and Conservation says that over a million people per year participate in shooting, including game shooting, clay pigeon shooting, and target shooting.
Shooting as practiced in Britain, as opposed to traditional hunting, requires little questing for game—around thirty-five million birds are released onto shooting estates every year, some having been factory farmed. Shoots can be elaborate affairs with guns placed in assigned positions and assistants to help load shotguns. When in position, "beaters" move through the areas of cover, swinging sticks or flags to drive the game out. Such events are often called "drives" / driven hunting / driven hunt (e.g., driven grouse shooting). The open season for grouse in the UK begins on 12 August, the so-called Glorious Twelfth. The definition of game in the United Kingdom is governed by the Game Act 1831 (1 & 2 Will. 4. c. 32).
A similar tradition, ojeo, exists in Spain.
United States
North American hunting pre-dates the United States by thousands of years and was an important part of many pre-Columbian Native American cultures. Native Americans retain some hunting rights and are exempt from some laws as part of Indian treaties and otherwise under federal law—examples include eagle feather laws and exemptions in the Marine Mammal Protection Act. This is considered particularly important in Alaskan native communities.
Gun usage in hunting is typically regulated by game category, area within the state, and time period. Regulations for big-game hunting often specify a minimum caliber or muzzle energy for firearms. The use of rifles is often banned for safety reasons in areas with high population densities or limited topographic relief. Regulations may also limit or ban the use of lead in ammunition because of environmental concerns. Specific seasons for bow hunting or muzzle-loading black-powder guns are often established to limit competition with hunters using more effective weapons.
Hunting in the United States is not associated with any particular class or culture; a 2006 poll showed seventy-eight per cent of Americans supported legal hunting, although relatively few Americans actually hunt. At the beginning of the 21st century, just six per cent of Americans hunted. Southerners in states along the eastern seaboard hunted at a rate of five per cent, slightly below the national average, and while hunting was more common in other parts of the South at nine per cent, these rates did not surpass those of the Plains states, where twelve per cent of Midwesterners hunted. Hunting in other areas of the country fell below the national average. Overall, in the 1996–2006 period, the number of hunters over the age of sixteen declined by ten per cent, a drop attributable to a number of factors including habitat loss and changes in recreation habits.
The principles of the fair chase have been a part of the American hunting tradition for over one hundred years. The role of the hunter-conservationist, popularised by Theodore Roosevelt, and perpetuated by Roosevelt's formation of the Boone and Crockett Club, has been central to the development of the modern fair chase tradition. Beyond Fair Chase: The Ethic and Tradition of Hunting, a book by Jim Posewitz, describes fair chase:
"Fundamental to ethical hunting is the idea of fair chase. This concept addresses the balance between the hunter and the hunted. It is a balance that allows hunters to occasionally succeed while animals generally avoid being taken."
When Internet hunting was introduced in 2005, allowing people to hunt over the Internet using remotely controlled guns, the practice was widely criticised by hunters as violating the principles of fair chase. As a representative of the National Rifle Association of America (NRA) explained, "The NRA has always maintained that fair chase, being in the field with your firearm or bow, is an important element of hunting tradition. Sitting at your desk in front of your computer, clicking at a mouse, has nothing to do with hunting."
Animals such as blackbuck, nilgai, axis deer, fallow deer, zebras, barasingha, gazelle and many other exotic game species can now be found on game farms and ranches in Texas, where they were introduced for sport hunting. These hunters can be found paying in excess of $10,000 to take trophy animals on these controlled ranches.
Russia
The Russian imperial hunts evolved from hunting traditions of early Russian rulers—Grand Princes and Tsars—under the influence of hunting customs of European royal courts. The imperial hunts were organised mainly in Peterhof, Tsarskoye Selo, and Gatchina.
Australia
Hunting in Australia has evolved around the hunting and eradication of various animals considered to be pests or invasive species . All native animals are protected by law, and certain species such as kangaroos and ducks can be hunted by licensed shooters but only under a special permit on public lands during open seasons. The introduced species that are targeted include European rabbits, red foxes, deer (sambar, hog, red, fallow, chital and rusa), feral cats, pigs, goats, brumbies, donkeys and occasionally camels, as well as introduced upland birds such as quails, pheasants and partridges.
New Zealand
New Zealand has a strong hunting culture. When humans arrived, the only mammals present on the islands making up New Zealand were bats, although seals and other marine mammals were present along the coasts. However, when humans arrived they brought other species with them. Polynesian voyagers introduced kuri (dogs), kiore (Polynesian rats), as well as a range of plant species. European explorers further added to New Zealand's biota, particularly pigs which were introduced by either Captain Cook or the French explorer De Surville in the 1700s. During the nineteenth century, as European colonisation took place, acclimatisation societies were established. The societies introduced a large number of species with no use other than as prey for hunting. Species that adapted well to the New Zealand terrain include deer, pigs, goats, hare, tahr and chamois. With wilderness areas, suitable forage, and no natural predators, their populations exploded. Government agencies view the animals as pests due to their effects on the natural environment and on agricultural production, but hunters view them as a resource.
Iran
Iranian tradition regarded hunting as an essential part of a prince's education, and hunting was well recorded for the education of the upper-class youths during pre-Islamic Persia. As of October 2020, a hunting licensee costs $20,000. The Department of Environment although do not report the number of permits issued.
Japan
The numbers of licensed hunters in Japan, including those using snares and guns, is generally decreasing, while their average age is increasing. As of 2010, there were approximately 190,000 registered hunters, approximately 65% of whom were sixty years old or older.
Trinidad and Tobago
There is a very active tradition of hunting small to medium-sized wild game in Trinidad and Tobago. Hunting is carried out with firearms, slingshots and cage traps, and sometimes aided by the use of hounds. The illegal use of trap guns and snare nets also occurs. With approximately 12,000 to 13,000 hunters applying for and being granted hunting permits in recent years, there is some concern that the practice might not be sustainable. In addition, there are at present no bag limits and the open season is comparatively very long (5 months – October to February inclusive). As such hunting pressure from legal hunters is very high. Added to that, there is a thriving and very lucrative black market for poached wild game (sold and enthusiastically purchased as expensive luxury delicacies) and the numbers of commercial poachers in operation is unknown but presumed to be fairly high. As a result, the populations of the five major mammalian game species (red-rumped agouti, lowland paca, nine-banded armadillo, collared peccary and red brocket deer) are thought to be relatively low when compared to less-hunted regions in nearby mainland South America (although scientifically conducted population studies are only just recently being conducted as of 2013). It appears that the red brocket deer population has been extirpated in Tobago as a result of over-hunting. By some time in the mid 20th century another extirpation due to over-hunting occurred in Trinidad with its population of horned screamer (a large game bird). Various herons, ducks, doves, the green iguana, the cryptic golden tegu, the spectacled caiman, the common opossum and the capybara are also commonly hunted and poached. There is also some poaching of 'fully protected species', including red howler monkey and capuchin monkeys, southern tamandua, Brazilian porcupine, yellow-footed tortoise, the critically endangered island endemic Trinidad piping guan and even one of the national birds, the scarlet ibis. Legal hunters pay relatively small fees to obtain hunting licenses and undergo no official basic conservation biology or hunting-ethics/fair chase training and are not assessed regarding their knowledge and comprehension of the local wildlife conservation laws. There is presumed to be relatively little subsistence hunting in the country (with most hunting for either sport or commercial profit). The local wildlife management authorities are under-staffed and under-funded, and as such little in the way of enforcement is done to uphold existing wildlife management laws, with hunting/poaching occurring both in and out of season and even in wildlife sanctuaries. There is some indication that the government is beginning to take the issue of wildlife management more seriously, with well drafted legislation being brought before Parliament in 2015. It remains to be seen if the drafted legislation will be fully adopted and financially supported by the current and future governments, and if the general populace will move towards a greater awareness of the importance of wildlife conservation and change the culture of wanton consumption to one of sustainable management.
Wildlife management
Hunting is claimed to give resource managers an important tool in managing populations that might exceed the carrying capacity of their habitat and threaten the well-being of other species, or, in some instances, damage human health or safety.
In some cases, hunting actually can increase the population of predators such as coyotes by removing territorial bounds that would otherwise be established, resulting in excess neighbouring migrations into an area, thus artificially increasing the population. Hunting advocates assert that hunting reduces intraspecific competition for food and shelter, reducing mortality among the remaining animals. Some environmentalists assert that (re)introducing predators would achieve the same end with greater efficiency and less negative effect, such as introducing significant amounts of free lead into the environment and food chain.
In the United States, wildlife managers are frequently part of hunting regulatory and licensing bodies, where they help to set rules on the number, manner and conditions in which game may be hunted.
Management agencies sometimes rely on hunting to control specific animal populations, as has been the case with deer in North America. These hunts may sometimes be carried out by professional shooters, although others may include amateur hunters. Many US city and local governments hire professional and amateur hunters each year to reduce populations of animals such as deer that are becoming hazardous in a restricted area, such as neighbourhood parks and metropolitan open spaces.
A large part of managing populations involves managing the number and, sometimes, the size or age of animals harvested so as to ensure the sustainability of the population. Tools that are frequently used to control harvest are bag limits and season closures, although gear restrictions such as archery-only seasons are becoming increasingly popular in an effort to reduce hunter success rates in countries that rely on bag limits per hunter instead of per area.
Laws
Illegal hunting and harvesting of wild species contrary to local and international conservation and wildlife management laws is called poaching. Game preservation is one of the tactics used to prevent poaching. Violations of hunting laws and regulations involving poaching are normally punishable by law. Punishment can include confiscation of equipment, fines or a prison sentence.
Right to hunt
The right to hunt—sometimes in combination with the right to fish—is protected implicitly, as a consequence of the right of ownership, or explicitly, as a right on its own, in a number of jurisdictions. For instance, as of 2019, a total of 22 U.S. states explicitly recognize a subjective right to hunt in their constitutions.
Bag limits
Bag limits are provisions under the law that control how many animals of a given species or group of species can be killed, although there are often species for which bag limits do not apply. There are also jurisdictions where bag limits are not applied at all or are not applied under certain circumstances. The phrase bag limits come from the custom among hunters of small game to carry successful kills in a small basket, similar to a fishing creel.
Where bag limits are used, there can be daily or seasonal bag limits; for example, ducks can often be harvested at a rate of six per hunter per day. Big game, like moose, most often have a seasonal bag limit of one animal per hunter. Bag limits may also regulate the size, sex, or age of animal that a hunter can kill. In many cases, bag limits are designed to allocate harvest among the hunting population more equitably rather than to protect animal populations, as protecting the population would necessitate regional density-dependent maximum bags.
Closed and open season
A closed season is a time during which hunting an animal of a given species is contrary to law. Typically, closed seasons are designed to protect a species when they are most vulnerable or to protect them during their breeding season. By extension, the period that is not the closed season is known as the open season.
Methods
Historical, subsistence, and sport hunting techniques can differ radically, with modern hunting regulations often addressing issues of where, when, and how hunts are conducted. Techniques may vary depending on government regulations, a hunter's personal ethics, local custom, hunting equipment, and the animal being hunted. Often a hunter will use a combination of more than one technique. Laws may forbid sport hunters from using some methods used primarily in poaching and wildlife management.
Statistics
Table
Graph
Trophy hunting
Trophy hunting is the selective seeking and killing of wild game animals to take trophies for personal collection, bragging rights or as a status symbol. It may also include the controversial hunting of captive or semi-captive animals expressly bred and raised under controlled or semi-controlled conditions so as to attain trophy characteristics; this is sometimes known as canned hunts.
History
In the 19th century, southern and central European sport hunters often pursued game only for a trophy, usually the head or pelt of an animal, which was then displayed as a sign of prowess. The rest of the animal was typically discarded. Some cultures, however, disapprove of such waste. In Nordic countries, hunting for trophies was—and still is—frowned upon. Hunting in North America in the 19th century was done primarily as a way to supplement food supplies, although it is now undertaken mainly for sport. The safari method of hunting was a development of sport hunting that saw elaborate travel in Africa, India and other places in pursuit of trophies. In modern times, trophy hunting persists and is a significant industry in some areas.
Conservation tool
According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, hunting "provides an economic incentive" for ranchers to continue to breed those species, and that hunting "reduces the threat of the species' extinction."
A scientific study in the journal, Biological Conservation, states that trophy hunting is of "major importance to conservation in Africa by creating economic incentives for conservation over vast areas, including areas which may be unsuitable for alternative wildlife-based land uses such as photographic ecotourism." However, another study states that less than 3% of a trophy hunters' expenditures reach the local level, meaning that the economic incentive and benefit is "minimal, particularly when we consider the vast areas of land that hunting concessions occupy."
Financial incentives from trophy hunting effectively more than double the land area that is used for wildlife conservation, relative to what would be conserved relying on national parks alone according to Biological Conservation, although local communities usually derive no more than 18 cents per hectare from trophy hunting.
Trophy hunting has been considered essential for providing economic incentives to conserve large carnivores according to research studies in Conservation Biology, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, Wildlife Conservation by Sustainable Use, and Animal Conservation. Studies by the Centre for Responsible Tourism and the IUCN state that ecotourism, which includes more than hunting, is a superior economic incentive, generating twice the revenue per acre and 39 times more permanent employment. At the cross-section of trophy hunting, ecotourism and conservation is green hunting, a trophy hunting alternative where hunters pay to dart animals that need to be tranquilized for conservation projects.
The U.S. House Committee on Natural Resources in 2016 concluded that trophy hunting may be contributing to the extinction of certain animals. Animal welfare organizations, including the International Fund for Animal Welfare, claim that trophy hunting is a key factor in the "silent extinction" of giraffes.
According to a national survey that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service conducts every five years, fewer people are hunting, even as population rises. National Public Radio reported, a graph shows 2016 statistics, that only about 5 per cent of Americans, 16 years old and older, actually hunt, which is half of what it was 50 years ago. The decline in popularity of hunting is expected to accelerate over the next decade, which threatens how US will pay for conservation.
Controversy
Trophy hunting is most often criticised when it involves rare or endangered animals. Opponents may also see trophy hunting as an issue of morality or animal cruelty, criticising the killing of living creatures for recreation. Victorian era dramatist W. S. Gilbert remarked, "Deer-stalking would be a very fine sport if only the deer had guns."
There is also debate about the extent to which trophy hunting benefits the local economy. Hunters pay substantial fees to the game outfitters and hunting guides which contributes to the local economy and provides value to animals that would otherwise be seen as competition for grazing, livestock, and crops. However, the argument is disputed by animal welfare organizations and other opponents of trophy hunting. It is argued that the animals are worth more to the community for ecotourism than hunting.
Economics
A variety of industries benefit from hunting and support hunting on economic grounds. In Tanzania, it is estimated that a safari hunter spends fifty to one hundred times that of the average ecotourist. While the average photo tourist may seek luxury accommodation, the average safari hunter generally stays in tented camps. Safari hunters are also more likely to use remote areas, uninviting to the typical ecotourist. Advocates argue that these hunters allow for anti-poaching activities and revenue for local communities.
In the United Kingdom, the game hunting of birds as an industry is said to be extremely important to the rural economy. The Cobham Report of 1997 suggested it to be worth around £700 million, and hunting and shooting lobby groups claimed it to be worth over a billion pounds less than ten years later.
Hunting also has a significant financial impact in the United States, with many companies specialising in hunting equipment or speciality tourism. Many different technologies have been created to assist hunters. Today's hunters come from a broad range of economic, social, and cultural backgrounds. In 2001, over thirteen million hunters averaged eighteen days hunting, and spent over $20.5 billion on their sport. In the US, proceeds from hunting licenses contribute to state game management programs, including preservation of wildlife habitat.
Hunting contributes to a portion of caloric intake of people and may have positive impacts on greenhouse gas emissions by avoidance of utilization of meat raised under industrial methods.
Environmental problems
Lead bullets that miss their target or remain in an unretrieved carcass could become a toxicant in the environment but lead in ammunition because of its metallic form has a lower solubility and higher resistance to corrosion than other forms of lead making it hardly available to biological systems. Waterfowl or other birds may ingest the lead and poison themselves with the neurotoxicant, but studies have demonstrated that effects of lead in ammunition are negligible on animal population size and growth. Since 1991, US federal law forbids lead shot in waterfowl hunts, and 30 states have some type of restriction.
In December 2014, a federal appeals court denied a lawsuit by environmental groups that the EPA must use the Toxic Substances Control Act to regulate lead in shells and cartridges. The groups sought EPA to regulate "spent lead", yet the court found EPA could not regulate spent lead without also regulating cartridges and shells.
Conservation
Hunters have been driving forces throughout history in the movement to ensure the preservation of wildlife habitats and wildlife for further hunting. However, excessive hunting and poachers have also contributed heavily to the endangerment, extirpation and extinction of many animals, such as the quagga, the great auk, Steller's sea cow, the thylacine, the bluebuck, the Arabian oryx, the Caspian and Javan tigers, the markhor, the Sumatran rhinoceros, the bison, the North American cougar, the Altai argali sheep, the Asian elephant and many more, primarily for commercial sale or sport. All these animals have been hunted to endangerment or extinction. Poaching currently threatens bird and mammalian populations around the world. The 2019 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services lists the direct exploitation of organisms, including hunting, as the second leading cause of biodiversity loss, after land use for agriculture. In 2022, IPBES released another report which stated that unsustainable hunting, along with unsustainable logging and fishing, are primary drivers of the global extinction crisis. A 2023 study published in BioScience posited that the prioritizing of hunting by state agencies in the United States over the rewinding of key species is "reinforcing" the loss of biodiversity.
Legislation
Pittman–Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act of 1937
In 1937, American hunters successfully lobbied the US Congress to pass the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act, which placed an eleven per cent tax on all hunting equipment. This self-imposed tax now generates over $700 million each year and is used exclusively to establish, restore and protect wildlife habitats. The act is named for Nevada Senator Key Pittman and Virginia Congressman Absalom Willis Robertson.
Federal Duck Stamp program
On 16 March 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Migratory Bird Hunting Stamp Act, which requires an annual stamp purchase by all hunters over the age of sixteen. The stamps are created on behalf of the program by the US Postal Service and depict wildlife artwork chosen through an annual contest. They play an important role in habitat conservation because ninety-eight per cent of all funds generated by their sale go directly toward the purchase or lease of wetland habitat for protection in the National Wildlife Refuge System. In addition to waterfowl, it is estimated that one third of the nation's endangered species seek food and shelter in areas protected using Duck Stamp funds.
Since 1934, the sale of Federal Duck Stamps has generated $670 million, and helped to purchase or lease 5,200,000 acres (8,100 sq mi; 21,000 km2) of habitat. The stamps serve as a license to hunt migratory birds, an entrance pass for all National Wildlife Refuge areas, and are also considered collector's items often purchased for aesthetic reasons outside of the hunting and birding communities. Although non-hunters buy a significant number of Duck Stamps, eighty-seven per cent of their sales are contributed by hunters. Distribution of funds is managed by the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission (MBCC).
Species
Arabian oryx
The Arabian oryx, a species of large antelope, once inhabited much of the desert areas of the Middle East. Native Bedouin tribes had long hunted the oryx using camels and arrows. Oil exploration made the habitat increasingly accessible, and the species' striking appearance made it (along with the closely related scimitar-horned oryx and addax) a popular quarry for sport hunters, including foreign executives of oil companies. The use of automobiles and high-powered rifles destroyed their only advantage: speed, and they became extinct in the wild exclusively due to sport hunting in 1972. The scimitar-horned oryx followed suit, while the addax became critically endangered. However, the Arabian oryx has now made a comeback and been upgraded from "extinct in the wild" to "vulnerable" due to conservation efforts like captive breeding.
Markhor
The markhor is an endangered species of wild goat which inhabits the mountains of Central Asia and Pakistan. The colonization of these regions by Britain gave British sport hunters access to the species, and they were hunted heavily, almost to the point of extinction. Only their willingness to breed in captivity and the inhospitability of their mountainous habitat prevented this. Despite these factors, the markhor is still endangered.
American bison
The American bison is a large bovid which inhabited much of western North America prior to the 1800s, living on the prairies in large herds. However, the vast herds of bison attracted market hunters, who killed dozens of bison for their hides only, leaving the rest to rot. Thousands of these hunters quickly eliminated the bison herds, bringing the population from several million in the early 1800s to a few hundred by the 1880s. Conservation efforts have allowed the population to increase, but the bison remains near-threatened due to lack of habitat.
White rhino
The Journal of International Wildlife Law and Policy cites that the legalization of white rhinoceros hunting in South Africa motivated private landowners to reintroduce the species onto their lands. As a result, the country saw an increase in white rhinos from fewer than one hundred individuals to more than 11,000, even while a limited number were killed as trophies.
However, the illegal hunting of rhinoceros for their horns is highly damaging to the population and is currently growing globally, with 1004 being killed in South Africa alone according to the most recent estimate. The White Rhino (along with the other 4 rhino species) are poached due to beliefs that the Rhinos horns can be used to cure Cancer, Arthritis and other diseases and illnesses, even though they are scientifically proven wrong.
Other species
According to Richard Conniff, Namibia is home to 1,750 of the roughly 5,000 black rhinos surviving in the wild because it allows trophy hunting of various species. Namibia's mountain zebra population has increased to 27,000 from 1,000 in 1982. Elephants, which "are gunned down elsewhere for their ivory", have gone to 20,000 from 15,000 in 1995. Lions, which were on the brink of extinction "from Senegal to Kenya", are increasing in Namibia.
In contrast, Botswana in 2012 banned trophy hunting following a precipitous wildlife decline. The numbers of antelope plummeted across Botswana, with a resultant decline in predator numbers, while elephant numbers remained stable and hippopotamus numbers rose. According to the government of Botswana, trophy hunting is at least partly to blame for this, but many other factors, such as poaching, drought and habitat loss are also to blame. Uganda recently did the same, arguing that "the share of benefits of sport hunting were lopsided and unlikely to deter poaching or improve [Uganda's] capacity to manage the wildlife reserves." In 2020, Botswana reopened trophy hunting on public lands.
Studies
A study published by the Wildlife Society concluded that hunting and trapping are cost effective tools that reduce wildlife damage by reducing a population below the capacity of the environment to carry it and changing the behaviors of animals to stop them from causing damage. The study furthermore states that the cessation of hunting could cause wildlife to be severely harmed, rural property values to fall, and the incentive of landowners to maintain natural habitats to diminish.
Although deforestation and forest degradation have long been considered the most significant threats to tropical biodiversity, across Southeast Asia (Northeast India, Indochina, Sundaland, Philippines) substantial areas of natural habitat have few wild animals (>1 kg), bar a few hunting‐tolerant species.
Opposition
Animal rights activists argue that killing animals for sport is unethical, cruel, and unnecessary. They note the suffering and cruelty inflicted on animals hunted for sport: "Many animals endure prolonged, painful deaths when they are injured but not killed by hunters. Hunting disrupts migration and hibernation patterns and destroys families." Animal rights activists also comment that hunting is not needed to maintain an ecological balance, and that "nature takes care of its own". They say that hunting can be combated on public lands by "spread[ing] deer repellent or human hair (from barber shops) near hunting areas". Animal rights activists also argue that hunting is speciesist:
Whether hunters try to justify their killing by citing human deaths caused by wild animals, by making conservationist claims, by claiming that it's acceptable to hunt as long as the animals' bodies are eaten, or simply because of the pleasure it brings them, the fact remains that hunting is morally unacceptable if we consider the interests of nonhuman animals. Hunted animals endure fear and pain, and then are deprived of their lives. Understanding the injustices of speciesism and the interests of nonhuman animals makes it clear that human pleasure cannot justify nonhuman animals' pain.
In Vietnam, Singapore, China, Brunei, hunting is almost entirely illegal. Except for aquatic and marine products, insects and rodents, amphibians, and some reptiles such as snakes and lizards. In China, after 2020, hunting as a livelihood for ethnic minorities almost disappeared due to the ban on consuming bushmeat. In Vietnam, although nominally some non-endangered species in group IIIA can be hunted with permits and forest owners, in reality no permits are issued. Some destructive species like sparrows and squirrels were previously overlooked by the government, but recently, regulations have been tightened. Although hunting some reptiles like sand lizards is illegal, the government considers it legal. A similar situation previously occurred with wild birds; many Vietnamese people consider wild birds as a resource to be exploited rather than a priority for conservation. In one survey, although many people claimed they rarely or never consumed wild animals, when asked if they had eaten egrets or herons, they were surprised. In Singapore, even frogs are considered wild animals.
In the arts

The ISASMELT process is an energy-efficient smelting process that was jointly developed from the 1970s to the 1990s by Mount Isa Mines (a subsidiary of MIM Holdings and now part of Glencore) and the Government of Australia's CSIRO. It has relatively low capital and operating costs for a smelting process.
ISASMELT technology has been applied to lead, copper, and nickel smelting. As of 2021, 22 plants were in operation in eleven countries, along with three demonstration plants located at Mt Isa. The installed capacity of copper/nickel operating plants in 2020 was 9.76 million tonnes per year of feed materials and 750 thousand tonnes per year across lead operating plants.
Smelters based on the copper ISASMELT process are among the lowest-cost copper smelters in the world.
The ISASMELT furnace
An ISASMELT furnace is an upright-cylindrical shaped steel vessel that is lined with refractory bricks. There is a molten bath of slag, matte or metal (depending on the application) at the bottom of the furnace. A steel lance is lowered into the bath through a hole in the roof of the furnace, and (possibly oxygen-enriched) air is injected through the lance, causing vigorous agitation of the bath.
Mineral concentrates or materials for recycling are dropped into the bath through another hole in the furnace roof or, in some cases, injected down the lance. These feed materials react with the oxygen in the injected gas, resulting in an intensive reaction in a small volume (relative to other smelting technologies).
ISASMELT lances contain one or more devices called "swirlers" that cause the injected gas to spin within the lance, forcing it against the lance wall, cooling it. The swirler consists of curved vanes around a central pipe forming an annular flow. They are designed to minimize pressure losses changing the angle from axial to tangential thus creating a strong vortex. The vortex helps mix liquids and solids with oxygen in the bath. The cooling effect results in a layer of slag "freezing" on the outside of the lance. This layer of solid slag protects the lance from the high temperatures inside the furnace. The tip of the lance that is submerged in the bath eventually wears out, and the worn lance is easily replaced with a new one when necessary. The worn tips are subsequently cut off and a new tip welded onto the lance body before it is returned to the furnace.
ISASMELT furnaces typically operate in the range of 1000–1200 °C, depending on the application. The refractory bricks that form the internal lining of the furnace protect the steel shell from the heat inside the furnace.
The products are removed from the furnace through one or more "tap holes" in a process called "tapping". This can be either continuous removal or in batches, with the tap holes being blocked with clay at the end of a tap, and then reopened by drilling or with a thermic lance when it is time for the next tap.
The products are allowed to separate in a settling vessel, such as a rotary holding furnace or an electric furnace.
While smelting sulfide concentrates, most of the energy needed to heat and melt the feed materials is derived from the reaction of oxygen with the sulfur and iron in the concentrate. However, a small amount of supplemental energy is required. ISASMELT furnaces can use a variety of fuels, including coal, coke, petroleum coke, oil and natural gas. The solid fuel can be added through the top of the furnace with the other feed materials, or it can be injected down the lance. Liquid and gaseous fuels are injected down the lance.
Advantages of the ISASMELT process
The advantages of the ISASMELT process include:
High productivity with a small footprint: Glencore's copper smelter in Mount Isa treats over 1 million t/y of copper concentrate through a single furnace 3.75 m in diameter. The small footprint makes the process well suited to retrofitting to existing smelters where there are significant space constraints
Simple operation: the ISASMELT furnace does not require extensive feed preparation as the feed can be discharged from a belt conveyor directly into the furnace
high energy efficiency: installing an ISASMELT furnace in the Mount Isa copper smelter reduced energy consumption by over 80% (through better use of the inherent energy contained in the sulfide concentrate) compared with the roaster and reverberatory furnaces previously used there
Flexibility in feed types: ISASMELT furnaces have been used to smelt copper, lead and nickel concentrates with a wide range of compositions, including high levels of magnetite, and secondary materials, such as copper scrap and lead-acid battery paste
Flexibility in fuel types: ISASMELT furnaces can operate with a variety of fuels, including lump coal of varying ranks, coke (lump or fine), petroleum coke, oil (including recycled oil), natural gas, and liquid petroleum gas, depending on which is the most economic at the smelter's location
High turn-down ratio: the feed rate to a single ISASMELT installation can easily be scaled up or down, depending on the availability of concentrate and the needs of the smelter
Low feed carry over: ISASMELT furnaces typically lose about 1% of the feed as carry-over with the waste gas, meaning less material needs to be returned to the furnace for retreatment
Effective containment of fugitive emissions: because the furnace has only two openings at the top, any fugitive emissions can easily be captured
High elimination of deleterious minor elements: due to the flushing action of the gases injected into the ISASMELT furnace slags, copper ISASMELT furnaces have a high elimination of minor elements, such as bismuth and arsenic, that can have deleterious effects on the properties of the product copper
High sulfur dioxide concentration in the waste gas: the use of oxygen enrichment gives the ISASMELT plants high sulfur dioxide concentrations in the waste gas stream, making acid plants cheaper to build and operate
Relatively low operating cost: the energy efficiency of the process, the simple feed preparation, the relative lack of moving parts, low feed carry-over rates, low labour requirements and the ease of replacing lances and refractory linings when they are worn give the ISASMELT process relatively low operating costs
Relatively low capital cost: the simplicity of the construction of the ISASMELT furnaces and the ability to treat concentrate without drying make it cheaper than other smelting processes.
History of the process
Early development (1973–1980)
The ISASMELT process began with the invention in 1973 of the Sirosmelt lance by Drs Bill Denholm and John Floyd at the CSIRO. The lance was developed as a result of investigations into improved tin-smelting processes, in which it was found that the use of a top-entry submerged lance would result in greater heat transfer and mass transfer efficiencies.
The idea of top-entry submerged lances goes back to at least 1902, when such a system was attempted in Clichy, France. However, early attempts failed because of the short lives of the lances on submersion in the bath. The Mitsubishi copper smelting process is one alternative approach, wherein lances are used in a furnace, but they are not submerged into the bath. Instead, they blow oxygen-enriched air onto the surface of the slag (top jetting). Similarly, a water-cooled, top-jetting lance was the basis of the LD (Linz-Donawitz) steelmaking process. This does not produce the same intensity of mixing in the bath as a submerged lance.
The CSIRO scientists first tried developing a submerged lance system using a water-cooled lance, but moved to an air-cooled system because "scale up of the water-cooled lance would have been problematic". Introducing any water to a system involving molten metals and slags can result in catastrophic explosions, such as that in the Scunthorpe Steelworks in November 1975 in which 11 men lost their lives.
The inclusion of the swirlers in the Sirosmelt lance and forming a splash coating of slag on the lance were the major innovations that led to the successful development of submerged lance smelting.
From 1973, the CSIRO scientists began a series of trials using the Sirosmelt lance to recover metals from industrial slags in Australia, including lead softener slag at the Broken Hill Associated Smelters in Port Pirie (1973), tin slag from Associated Tin Smelters in Sydney (1974), copper converter slag at the Electrolytic Refining and Smelting ("ER&S") Port Kembla plant (1975) and copper anode furnace slag at Copper Refineries Limited (another subsidiary of MIM Holdings) in Townsville (1976) and of copper converter slag in Mount Isa (1977). The work then proceeded to smelting tin concentrates (1975) and then sulfidic tin concentrates (1977).
MIM and ER&S jointly funded the 1975 Port Kembla converter slag treatment trials and MIM's involvement continued with the slag treatment work in Townsville and Mount Isa.
In parallel with the copper slag treatment work, the CSIRO was continuing to work in tin smelting. Projects included a five tonne ("t") plant for recovering tin from slag being installed at Associated Tin Smelters in 1978, and the first sulfidic smelting test work being done in collaboration with Aberfoyle Limited, in which tin was fumed from pyritic tin ore and from mixed tin and copper concentrates. Aberfoyle was investigating the possibility of using the Sirosmelt lance approach to improve the recovery of tin from complex ores, such as its mine at Cleveland, Tasmania, and the Queen Hill ore zone near Zeehan in Tasmania.
The Aberfoyle work led to the construction and operation in late 1980 of a four t/h tin matte fuming pilot plant at the Western Mining Corporation's Kalgoorlie Nickel Smelter, located to the south of Kalgoorlie, Western Australia.
Lead ISASMELT development
Small-scale work (1978–1983)
In the early 1970s, the traditional blast furnace and sinter plant technology that was the mainstay of the lead smelting industry was coming under sustained pressure from more stringent environmental requirements, increased energy costs, decreasing metal prices and rising capital and operating costs.
Many smelting companies were seeking new processes to replace sinter plants and blast furnaces. Possibilities included the QSL lead smelting process, the Kivcet process, the Kaldo top-blown rotary converter, and adapting Outokumpu's successful copper and nickel flash furnace to lead smelting.
MIM was seeking ways to safeguard the future of its Mount Isa lead smelting operations. It did this in two ways:
working to improve the environmental and operational performance of its existing operations
investigating new technologies.
MIM investigated new technologies by arranging plant testing of large parcels of Mount Isa lead concentrates for all the then process options except for the Kivcet process. At the same time, it had been aware of the use of top-jetting lances in the Mitsubishi and Kaldo processes, and of top-entry submerged combustion lance investigations undertaken by Asarco (which had a long association with MIM, including being a shareholder in MIM Holdings) in the 1960s. This stimulated MIM's interest in the Sirosmelt lance, which was seen as a way to produce a robust submerged lance.
Following the copper slag trials of 1976–1978, MIM initiated a joint project with the CSIRO in 1978 to investigate the possibility of applying Sirosmelt lances to lead smelting.
The work began with computer modelling the equilibrium thermodynamics (1978) and was followed by laboratory bench-scale test work using large alumina silicate crucibles (1978–1979). The results were sufficiently encouraging that MIM built a 120 kg/h test rig in Mount Isa. It began operation in September 1980. This was used to develop a two-stage process to produce lead bullion from Mount Isa lead concentrate. The first stage was an oxidation step that removed virtually all the sulfur from the feed, oxidising the contained lead to lead oxide (PbO) that was largely collected in the slag (some was carried out of the furnace as lead oxide fume that was returned for lead recovery). The second stage was a reduction step in which the oxygen was removed from the lead to form lead metal.
The lead ISASMELT pilot plant (1983–1990)
Following the 120 kg/h test work, MIM decided to proceed to install a 5 t/h lead ISASMELT pilot plant in its Mount Isa lead smelter. It bought Aberfoyle's matte fuming furnace and transported it from Kalgoorlie to Mount Isa, where it was rebuilt and commissioned in 1983 to demonstrate the first stage of the process in continuous operation and for testing the reduction step using batches of high-lead slag.
One of the key features of the pilot plant was that it was run by operations’ personnel in the lead smelter as though it was an operations’ plant. The high lead slag produced by the continuous smelting of the lead concentrate was subsequently treated in the sinter plant, thus increasing the production of the lead smelter by up to 17%. This gave the operations’ people ownership of the plant and an incentive to make it work, thus ensuring management and maintenance priority. It also gave MIM assurance that the process was simple enough to be operable in a production environment, with normal staff and supervision, and that it was robust enough to withstand normal control excursions. In addition to the continuous operation of lead concentrate to produce high-lead slag, the pilot plant was used to produce lead metal from batches of the slag, investigate the wear rates of the furnace's refractory lining and lances, and initial work aimed at developing a low-pressure version of the Sirosmelt lance. The result was a lance design that allowed operation at significantly lower pressure than the initial values of about 250 kilopascal (gauge) ("kPag"), thus reducing operating costs.
MIM built a second, identical furnace next to the first, and commissioned it in August 1985. This combination of furnaces was used to demonstrate the two-stage process in continuous operation in mid-1987. However, for most of the time the two furnaces were not able to operate simultaneously due to a constraint in the capacity of the baghouse used to filter the lead dust from the waste gas.
A series of process improvements, particularly in the waste gas handling system, resulted in increasing the throughput of the plant from the initial design of 5 t/h to 10 t/h. The pilot plant had treated more than 125,000 t of lead concentrate by April 1989.
The two furnaces were also used to develop a process to recover lead from the Mount Isa lead smelter's drossing operations.
The lead ISASMELT demonstration plant (1991–1995)
Based on the results of the pilot plant work, the MIM Holdings Board of Directors approved the construction of an A$65 million demonstration plant, capable of producing 60,000 t/y of lead bullion. This plant operated from early 1991 until 1995. It was initially designed to treat 20 t/h of lead concentrate using lance air enriched to 27%. However, the oxygen originally designated for its use was diverted to the more profitable copper smelting operations, and the feed rate to the lead ISASMELT demonstration plant was severely restricted. When there was sufficient oxygen available in 1993 to increase the enrichment level to 33–35%, treatment rates of up to 36 t/h of concentrate were achieved, with residual lead in the final reduction furnace slag being in the range of 2–5%.
The two-stage approach to ISASMELT lead smelting was partly driven by the relatively low lead content of Mount Isa lead concentrates (typically in the range of 47–52% lead during the lead ISASMELT development period). Trying to produce lead bullion in a single furnace with such low concentrate grades would result in excessive fuming of lead oxide with a huge amount of material that would have to be returned to the furnace to recover the lead and, consequently, a higher energy demand as that material had to be reheated to the furnace temperatures.
Concentrates with higher lead contents can be smelted directly into lead metal in a single furnace without excess fuming. This was demonstrated on the large scale in 1994, when 4000 t of concentrate containing 67% lead were treated at rates up to 32 t/h with lance air enriched to 27%. During these trials, 50% of the lead in the concentrate was converted to lead bullion in the smelting furnace, while most of the rest ended up as lead oxide in the smelting furnace slag.
Like the lead ISASMELT pilot plant, the lead ISASMELT demonstration plant suffered from constraints imposed by the waste gas handling system. In the case of the demonstration plant, the problem was caused by sticky fume that formed an insulating layer on the convection tube bundles of the waste heat boilers, significantly reducing the heat transfer rates and thus the ability of the boilers to reduce the waste gas temperature. As the plant used baghouses to filter lead fume from the waste gas, it was necessary to reduce the temperature of the gas below the point at which the bags would be damaged by high temperatures. The problem was solved by allowing cool air to mix with the hot waste gas to lower the temperature to a level at which the baghouse could operate. This reduced the ISASMELT plant's capacity because it was again limited by the volume of gas that could be filtered by the baghouse.
The lead ISASMELT demonstration plant was mothballed in 1995 because there was insufficient concentrate to keep both it and the rest of the lead smelter operating. It was too small to treat all the Mount Isa lead concentrate by itself.
Commercial primary-lead ISASMELT plants (since 2005)
The first commercial primary-lead ISASMELT furnace was installed at the Yunnan Chihong Zinc and Germanium Company Limited (YCZG) greenfield zinc and lead smelting complex at Qujing in Yunnan Province in China. This furnace was part of a plant consisting of the ISASMELT furnace and a blast furnace specially designed to treat high-lead ISASMELT slag. The ISASMELT furnace was designed to produce both the slag and lead bullion, with about 40% of the lead in the concentrate being converted to lead bullion in the ISASMELT furnace.
The ISASMELT–blast furnace combination was designed to treat 160,000 t/y of lead concentrate.
The second commercial primary-lead ISASMELT furnace was commissioned at Kazzinc's smelting complex at Ust-Kamenogorsk in Kazakhstan in 2012. It is designed to treat 300,000 t/y of lead concentrate, again using an ISASMELT–blast furnace combination.
YCZG is constructing another lead ISASMELT at a new greenfield smelter in Huize in China, and this is due to be commissioned in 2013.
In June 2017, Glencore announced that Nyrstar NV had acquired an Isasmelt licence for its new Ausmelt furnace in Port Pirie. As part of the agreement, Nyrstar engaged training and ramp-up support services for the Ausmelt furnace and blast furnace by personnel from Glencore's Kazzinc operations in Kazakhstan. This involved training Nyrstar personnel at Ust-Kamenogorsk operations and site support by Kazzinc personnel during the commissioning and ramp-up stages of the Ausmelt plant.
Secondary-lead smelting (since 1982)
While the lead ISASMELT 5 t/h pilot plant was being designed in 1982–1983, MIM continued to use the 120 kg/h test rig to develop other processes, including the dross treatment process previously mentioned, and the treatment of lead-acid battery paste for lead recycling.
The MIM Holdings Board of Directors approved the construction of an ISASMELT plant at Britannia Refined Metals, the company's lead refinery at Northfleet in the United Kingdom, for commercial recovery of lead from battery paste to supplement the existing plant, which used a short rotary furnace to produce 10,000 t/y of lead. The new plant increased annual production to 30,000 t/y of recycled lead, and was commissioned in 1991. The ISASMELT furnace was used to produce low-antimony lead bullion from the battery paste and an antimony-rich slag that contained 55–65% lead oxide. While it was possible to recover the lead from the slag in the ISASMELT furnace by a reduction step, the total throughput of the plant was increased by treating the slag in the short rotary furnace when sufficient quantities of the slag had been generated. The plant was designed to treat 7.7 t/h of battery paste, but routinely treated 12 t/h. The plant was shut down in 2004 when Xstrata Zinc, which took over the MIM Holdings lead operations, decided to leave the lead recycling business.
A second lead ISASMELT plant for recovering lead from recycled batteries was commissioned in 2000 in Malaysia at Metal Reclamation Industries’ Pulau Indah plant. This ISASMELT plant has a design capacity of 40,000 t/y of lead bullion.
Copper ISASMELT development
Small-scale test work (1979–1987)
Scientists at the CSIRO conducted small-scale test work on copper sulfide concentrate in 1979, using the CSIRO's 50 kg Sirosmelt test rig. These trials included producing copper matte containing 40–52% copper and, in some cases, converting the matte to produce blister copper.
The results of this work were sufficiently encouraging that MIM in 1983 undertook its own copper smelting test work program using its 120 kg/h test rig, which had by then been rerated to 250 kg/h. It was found that the process was easy to control and that copper loss to slag was low. It was also learned that the process could easily recover copper from copper converter slag concentrate, of which there was a large stockpile at Mount Isa.
The copper ISASMELT demonstration plant (1987–1992)
Construction of a 15 t/h demonstration copper ISASMELT plant began in 1986. The design was based on MIM's 250 kg/h test work and operating experience with the lead ISASMELT pilot plant. It cost A$11 million and was commissioned in April 1987. The initial capital cost was recovered in the first 14 months of operation.
As with the lead ISASMELT pilot plant, the copper ISASMELT demonstration plant was integrated into copper smelter operations and justified by the 20% (30,000 t/y) increase in copper production that it provided. It quickly treated the entire backlog of converter slag concentrate, which could not be treated at high rates in the reverberatory furnaces without generating magnetite ("Fe3O4") accretions that would necessitate shutting down the reverberatory furnaces for their removal.
The demonstration copper ISASMELT plant was used to further develop the copper process. Refractory life was initially shorter than expected and considerable effort was devoted to understanding the reasons and attempting to extend the life of the refractories. At the end of the life of the demonstration plant, the longest refractory life achieved was 90 weeks.
Lance life was also low initially. Inexperienced operators could destroy a lance in as little as 10 minutes. However, as a result of modifications to the lance design, the development of techniques to determine the position of the lance in the bath, and a rise in the operating experience, the typical lance life was extended to a week.
The demonstration plant was commissioned with high-pressure (700 kPag) air injected down the lance. Later, after extensive testing of low-pressure lance designs and trials using oxygen enrichment of the lance air, a 70 t/d oxygen plant and a 5 Nm3/s blower with a discharge pressure of 146 kPag were purchased. The new lance design was capable of operating at pressures below 100 kPag. Using enrichment of the oxygen in the lance air to 35%, the demonstration plant throughput was lifted to 48 t/h of concentrate, and the gross energy used during smelting was reduced from 25.6 GJ/t of contained copper to 4.1 GJ/t.
Commercial primary-copper ISASMELT plants (since 1990)
The successful operation and development of the demonstration copper ISASMELT, and the degree of interest shown in the new process by the global smelting community, gave MIM Holdings sufficient confidence to license the ISASMELT technology to external companies, so an agreement under which MIM could incorporate the Sirosmelt lance into ISASMELT technology was signed with the CSIRO in 1989.
AGIP Australia
MIM signed the first ISASMELT licence agreement with Agip Australia Proprietary Limited ("Agip") in July 1990. Agip, a subsidiary of the Italian oil company ENI, was developing the Radio Hill nickel-copper deposit near Karratha in Western Australia. MIM and representatives of Agip conducted a series of trials in which 4 tonnes of Radio Hill concentrate was smelted in the 250 kg/h test rig at Mount Isa.
The Agip ISASMELT plant was designed to treat 7.5 t/h of the Radio Hill concentrate and produce 1.5 t/h of granulated matte with a combined nickel and copper content of 45% for sale., It was the same size as the copper ISASMELT demonstration plant (2.3 m internal diameter) and had a 5.5 Nm3/s blower to provide the lance air. Commissioning of the plant began in September 1991; however, the Radio Hill mine and smelter complex were forced to close by low nickel prices after less than six months, before commissioning was completed. The ISASMELT furnace achieved its design capacity within three months. Subsequent owners of the mine focussed on mining and mineral processing only, and the ISASMELT plant has been dismantled.
Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold
In 1973, the Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold ("Freeport") smelter at Miami, Arizona, installed a 51 MW electric furnace at its Miami smelter. The decision was based on a long-term electrical power contract with the Salt River Project that provided the company with a very low rate for electricity. This contract expired in 1990 and the resulting increase in electricity prices prompted the owners of the smelter, Cyprus Miami Mining Corporation ("Cyprus"), to seek alternative smelting technologies for lower operating costs.
The technologies evaluated included:
Contop flame cyclone reactor
Inco flash furnace
ISASMELT
Mitsubishi furnace
Noranda reactor
Outokumpu flash furnace
Teniente furnace.
The Contop, Inco, Mitsubishi and Outokumpu processes "were all eliminated primarily because of their high dust levels, high capital costs and poor adaptability to the existing facility". The Teniente converter was ruled out because it required the use of the electric furnace for partial smelting. The Noranda reactor was not selected "because of its high refractory wear and its poor adaptability to the existing plant due to the handling of the reactor slag". ISASMELT was chosen as the preferred technology and a licence agreement was signed with MIM in October 1990. The major factor in the decision to select the ISASMELT technology was the ability to fit it into the existing plant and to maximise the use of existing equipment and infrastructure, while the major disadvantage was seen to be the risks associated with scaling up the technology from the Mount Isa demonstration plant.
The Miami copper ISASMELT furnace was designed to treat 590,000 t/y (650,000 short tons per year) of copper concentrate, a treatment rate that was constrained by the capacity of the sulfuric acid plant used to capture the sulfur dioxide from the smelter's waste gases. The existing electric furnace was converted from smelting duties to a slag cleaning furnace and providing matte surge capacity for the converters. The ISASMELT furnace was commissioned on 11 June 1992 and in 2002 treated over 700,000 t/y of concentrate. The modernisation of the Miami smelter cost an estimated US$95 million.
In 1993, the Cyprus Minerals Company merged with AMAX to form the Cyprus Amax Minerals company, which was in turn taken over by the Phelps Dodge Corporation in late 1999. After the take-over, Phelps Dodge closed its Hidalgo and Chino smelters. Phelps Dodge was acquired by Freeport in 2006.
The Miami smelter is one of only two remaining operating copper smelters in the United States, down from 16 in 1979.
Mount Isa Mines
The third commercial copper ISASMELT plant was installed in MIM's Mount Isa copper smelter at a cost of approximately A$100 million. It was designed to treat 104 t/h of copper concentrate, containing 180,000 t/y of copper, and it began operation in August 1992.
A significant difference between the Mount Isa copper ISASMELT plant and all the others is that it uses an Ahlstrom Fluxflow waste heat boiler to recover heat from the furnace waste gas. This boiler uses a recirculating fluid bed of particles to rapidly quench the gas as it leaves the furnace, and then uses the enhanced heat transfer properties of solid–solid contact to cool the particles as they are carried past boiler tubes that are suspended in a shaft above the bed. The high heat transfer rate means that the Fluxflow boiler is relatively compact compared with conventional waste heat boilers and the rapid cooling of the waste gas limits the formation of sulfur trioxide ("SO3"), which in the presence of water forms sulfuric acid that can cause corrosion of cool surfaces.
In its early years, the Fluxflow boiler was the cause of significant down time, because the rate of wear of the boiler tubes was much higher than expected. The problems were solved by understanding the gas flows within the boiler and redesigning the boiler tubes to minimise the effects of erosion.
The life of the refractory bricks in the ISASMELT furnace was initially shorter than expected and a water cooling system was briefly considered to extend them; however, this was not installed and operational improvements resulted in a significant extension of the lining life without this capital and operating expense. Since 1998, the refractory lining lives have exceeded their two-year design, with lives of the 8th and 9th linings nearly reaching three years. The most recent lining lasted for 50 months, with the one before that lasting for 44 months.
In the first years of operation at Mount Isa, the throughput of the ISASMELT furnace was constrained by problems with some of the ancillary equipment in the plant, including the boiler, slag granulation system and concentrate filters. The ultimate constraint was the decision during its construction to keep one of the two reverberatory furnaces on line to increase the copper smelter production to 265,000 t/y of anode copper. The smelter's Peirce-Smith converters became a bottleneck and the feed rate of the ISASMELT furnace had to be restrained to allow sufficient matte to be drawn from the reverberatory furnace to prevent it freezing solid. The ISASMELT 12-month rolling average of the feed rate fell just short of 100 t/h for much of this period, not quite reaching the design annual average of 104 t/h. MIM decided to shut down the reverberatory furnace in 1997, and the ISASMELT plant 12-month rolling mean feed rate quickly exceeded the 104 t/h design when this constraint was lifted.
The performance of the ISASMELT plant was sufficiently encouraging that MIM decided to expand the ISASMELT treatment rate to 166 t/h by adding a second oxygen plant to allow higher enrichment of the lance air. As a result, by late 2001 it had achieved a peak rate of 190 t/h of concentrate, and the smelter produced a peak annual total of 240,000 t of anode copper. At that time, the Mount Isa copper smelter, together with its copper refinery in Townsville, was among the lowest cost copper smelters in the world.
Lance life is typically two weeks, with lance changes taking 30 to 40 minutes, and repairs usually being limited to replacement of the lance tips.
In 2006, MIM commissioned a second rotary holding furnace that operates in parallel with the existing holding furnace.
Sterlite Industries
Sterlite Industries ("Sterlite"), a subsidiary of Vedanta Resources, built a copper smelter in Tuticorin using an ISASMELT furnace and Peirce-Smith converters. The smelter was commissioned in 1996 and was designed to produce 60,000 t/y of copper (450,000 t/y of copper concentrate), but by increasing the oxygen content of the lance air and making modifications to other equipment, the ISASMELT furnace feed rate was increased to the point where the smelter was producing 180,000 t/y of copper.
Sterlite commissioned a new ISASMELT furnace in May 2005 that was designed to treat 1.3 million t/y of copper concentrate, and the smelter's production capacity was expanded to 300,000 t/y of copper. The new plant reached its design capacity, measured over a three-month period, six months after it started treating its first feed. Vedanta's website states that the new ISASMELT furnace was successfully ramped up "in a record period of 45 days".
Since then Sterlite decided to further expand its copper production by installing a third ISASMELT smelter and new refinery using IsaKidd technology. The new smelter has a design capacity of 1.36 million t/y of copper concentrate (containing 400,000 t/y of copper), processed through a single ISASMELT furnace.
Yunnan Copper Corporation
In the 1990s, the Chinese government decided to increase the efficiency of the Chinese economy and reduce the environmental effects of heavy industry by modernising plants. As a response, the Yunnan Copper Corporation ("YCC") upgraded its existing plant, which was based on a sinter plant and an electric furnace, with a copper ISASMELT furnace. As with the Miami smelter, the electric furnace was converted from smelting duty to separation of matte and slag and providing matte surge capacity for the converters, and again, the small footprint of the ISASMELT furnace was very important in retrofitting it to the existing smelter.
The YCC ISASMELT plant had a design capacity of 600,000 dry t/y of copper concentrate and started smelting concentrate on 15 May 2002. YCC placed a lot of emphasis on training its operators, sending people to Mount Isa for training over a seven-month period during 2001 ahead of the ISASMELT commissioning. The total cost of the smelter modernisation program, including the ISASMELT furnace, was 640 million yuan (approximately US$80 million) and the smelter's concentrate treatment rate increased from 470,000 t/y to 800,000 t/y as a result.
The transfer of operating knowledge from MIM to YCC was sufficient for the first ISASMELT furnace refractory lining to last for two years, a marked improvement on the life of the initial lining of other plants.
YCC described the modernisation project as "a great success, achieving all that was expected." Energy consumption per tonne of blister copper produced decreased by 34% as a result of installing the ISASMELT furnace, and YCC estimated that during the first 38 months of operation, it saved approximately US$31.4 million through reduced energy costs alone, giving the modernisation a very short payback by industry standards.
In 2004, YCC's management was presented with awards for Innovation in Project Management and the National Medal for High Quality Projects by the Chinese government to mark the success of the smelter modernisation project.
Xstrata subsequently licensed YCC to build three more ISASMELT plants, one in Chuxiong in Yunnan Province, China to treat 500,000 t/y of copper concentrate, one in Liangshan in Sichuan Province, China and the other in Chambishi in Zambia to treat 350,000 t/y of concentrate. Chuxiong and Chambishi were commissioned in 2009. Liangshan was commissioned in 2012.
Mopani Copper Mines, as part of Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines Limited
Southern Peru Copper Corporation
In the 1990s, Southern Peru Copper Corporation ("SPCC") was seeking to modernise its smelter at Ilo in southern Peru as part of 1997 commitment to the Peruvian government to capture at least 91.7% of the sulfur dioxide generated in its smelting operations by January 2007. It initially selected flash smelting technology to replace its reverberatory furnaces, at a cost of almost US$1 billion; however, one of the first actions following Grupo México's acquisition of ASARCO was to review the proposed Ilo smelter modernisation plans.
Kazzinc
Kazzinc selected the copper ISASMELT process for its Ust-Kamenogorsk metallurgical complex. It is designed to treat 290,000 t/y of copper concentrate and was commissioned in 2011. A projected capital cost for the smelter and refinery in 2006 was US$178 million.
Commercial secondary-copper ISASMELT plants
In addition to treating copper concentrates, ISASMELT furnaces have also been built to treat secondary (scrap) copper materials.
Umicore
In the early 1990s, technical personnel from the then Union Miniére worked with MIM Holdings personnel to develop an ISASMELT-based process to treat scrap materials and residues containing copper and lead. Union Miniére operated a smelter at Hoboken, near Antwerpen in Belgium, that specialised in recycling scrap non-ferrous materials. The test work program was undertaken using an ISASMELT test rig at MIM Holdings’ lead refinery, Britannia Refined Metals, at Northfleet in the United Kingdom.
A demonstration plant was designed by MIM Holdings personnel and operated for several months at the Hoboken smelter site. The new smelter was commissioned in the final quarter of 1997 and in 2007 was treating up to 300,000 t/y of secondary materials. The installation of the ISASMELT furnace replaced a roasting plant, a sinter plant, 1 of two sulfuric acid plants, a copper blast furnace and four Hoboken converters. It substantially reduced operating costs at the Hoboken smelter.
Umicore's Hoboken plant uses a two-step process in a single furnace. The first step involves the oxidation of the feed to form a copper matte and a lead-rich slag. The slag is then tapped and the remaining copper matte is then converted to blister copper. The lead-rich slag is subsequently reduced in a blast furnace to produce lead metal, while the copper is refined and the contained precious metals recovered.
Aurubis
The Hüttenwerke Kayser smelter at Lünen in Germany installed an ISASMELT plant in 2002 to replace three blast furnaces and one Peirce-Smith converter used for smelting scrap copper. The company was subsequently bought by Norddeutsche Affinerie AG, which in turn became Aurubis.
The process used at the Lünen smelter involves charging the furnace with copper residues and scrap containing between 1 and 80% copper and then melting it in a reducing environment. This produces a "black copper phase" and a low-copper silica slag. Initially the black copper was converted to blister copper in the ISASMELT furnace. However, in 2011 the smelter was expanded as part of the "KRS Plus" project. A top-blown rotary converter is used to convert the black copper and the ISASMELT furnace runs continuously in smelting mode.
The installation of the ISASMELT furnace increased the overall copper recovery in the plant by reducing losses to slag, reduced the number of furnaces in operation, decreased the waste gas volume, and decreased energy consumption by more than 50%. The production capacity exceeds the original design by 40%.
Kandanshi
Atlantic Copper

The Ilfracombe Iron Company (I.I.C.) was an iron mining and smelting company that operated in Northern Tasmania in 1873 and 1874. The company's operations included a blast furnace, ore mine, water wheel, village, and jetty. The I.I.C. rebuilt a disused timber-haulage tramway, terminating at Ilfracombe—now the southern part of modern-day Beauty Point—which it extended at both ends to reach its iron ore mine and its jetty. The ruin of its blast furnace is significant, as one of the only three such ruins of 19th-Century iron-smelting blast furnaces in Australia and the only one in Tasmania. It is the only remaining ruin—in Australia—of a 19th-Century blast furnace that had an iron shell.
Iron ore from the company's mine was smelted at a foundry in Melbourne in 1873. Two bells were cast from this iron; the smaller one was exhibited at the Victorian Exhibition (1872–73) in Melbourne and the larger bell at the Vienna Exposition of 1873.
The company constructed a blast furnace alongside a tributary of Middle Arm Creek. It originally intended to power the blast machinery from a large water wheel, which was erected but not used. Despite several design iterations, the steam-powered blast machinery was severely under-sized. Before this situation could be rectified, by raising more capital, the Oriental Bank foreclosed. The assets were sold cheaply; possibly, the new owner intended to restart operations. However, a large fall in the price of iron seems to have ended that possibility.
It remains questionable that the blast furnace actually produced any pig iron, although the company announced in an ambiguous telegram that it had.
Historical context
Soon after the first settlement in Northern Tasmania, at York Town in 1804, colonial settlers found that there were extensive deposits of iron ore in the hills to the west of the Tamar estuary. Interest in the area was aroused again by the report in 1866 of the Government Geologist, Charles Gould.
There was an increase in pig-iron prices in the early 1870s, which led to the formation of a number of colonial era iron-making ventures in Australia. The price of imported pig-iron increased, from £4 10s per ton in 1870 to £9 per ton in 1873 greatly advantaging locally manufactured iron. However, this high price did not last long, as iron-making capacity increased and pig-iron was once again imported cheaply as ballast in sailing ships returning from England to Australia.
The Ilfracombe Iron Company was one of four ventures that smelted iron from local iron ore, in Tasmania during the 1870s; the others were, the British and Tasmanian Charcoal Iron Company, the Tamar Hematite Iron Company—both nearby on the Tamar estuary—and the Derwent Iron Company. A fifth venture, the Swedish Charcoal Iron Company never went beyond issuing a prospectus. There were also three commercial iron-smelting operations in mainland Australia during the 1870s, the Fitzroy Iron Works, the Lal Lal Iron Company, and the Lithgow Valley Iron Works.
Smelting materials
The ore deposit was the first of the deposits in the West Tamar area that were mentioned by Charles Gould in his report of 1866. It was located on private property at on a tributary of Middle Arm Creek, on the western flank of Peaked Hill, about 5 km south of the modern-day town of Beaconsfield. The company later located its smelting site adjacent to this deposit.
A sample, consisting of "hematite and brown ore", had the following analysis:
"Iron ......... 60.6 [%]
Silica ........ 2.4 [%]
Sulphur and phosphorus, though carefully sought for were not detected."
Limestone was obtained from deposits nearby. The fuel used was charcoal, burnt from local timber.
History of operations
Foundation of the company
The force behind the new company was Captain Duncan Longden. The other major shareholders were Ayde Douglas (a Tasmanian lawyer and politician, who was also an owner of a previous, then dormant timber venture in the same area), James Major (of the Melbourne engineering firm Doyne, Major and Willet), James Bickerton, John Robb, David Spence, and two others.
The company was at work for some time before it was officially registered. During this period, it was mainly Longden and Major who were active. The two secured a 3,000 acre leasehold in 1872.
The Ilfracombe Iron Company was registered on 28 January 1873. It had an authorised capital of £50,000 in 10,000 £5 shares. 2000 of the shares were issued as fully paid, probably in exchange for properties, assets and services that the new company needed. The remaining shares were partly paid, to £4.
Trial smelting and exhibition castings
Before the Ilfracombe Iron Company was even registered, it had sent iron ore to Melbourne for a trial smelting, at the Railway Foundry, owned by Drysdale and Fraser. In November 1872, the iron ore was smelted with coke and limestone in a furnace—probably a cupola furnace—and various castings were made, including two bells, seven 'pigs' weighing 2-stone (12.7 kg) and one pig weighing 3-hundredweight (152 kg), and "half-a-dozen 18lb. [8.2 kg] cannon balls". It seems that a total of around 400 kg of iron was made, the first time that Tasmanian iron ore had been smelted in a significant quantity in Australia.
The smaller bell—weighing about 9 kg—was exhibited at the Victorian Exposition of 1872-1873. The larger bell—about 2 feet high, 18 inches wide at mouth, and weighing 210 lbs (95 kg)—was exhibited at the Vienna Exposition of 1873, where it was inspected in September 1873 by Emperor Franz Joseph. It had the coat of arms of Melbourne on one side and, along the rim on the other side, the words "Ilfracombe Iron Company". The ability to cast bells directly from the pig-iron demonstrated its quality.
Construction
The on-site manager was a civil engineer, Benjamin Hawkins Dodds, who had experience in the Scottish iron industry. The construction of the furnace was the responsibility of a Swedish furnaceman, Karl Haine, with the advice of James Baird Thorneycroft from Scotland.
The foundation stone of the furnace was laid on 12 May 1873, by David Spence, a Melbourne merchant, who was a shareholder. Progress was rapid, with a visitor to the site, in September 1873, reporting extensive progress, with about 100 men working at the site and the work nearly completed.
Delays
A fire was lit in the furnace in August 1873 and maintained thereafter, to dry out the furnace to be ready for production. The company prepared a pattern to cast plaques to commemorate what it planned as its first casting of pig-iron in "October 1873". The pattern still survives—held by the Queen Victoria Museum and Art Gallery in Launceston—but the casting in October never occurred.
In early November 1873, it emerged that the iron could not be run because the steam engine used to drive the blast machinery was too small. Another larger engine was on its way from Melbourne, which would be used, "till the water wheel is ready to perform the work, and will then standby to be used in time of emergency, should such arise".
Announcements of success and subsequent closure
On 24 November 1873, a small article appeared in the Melbourne newspaper The Argus. It read, " WITH reference to iron mining in Tasmania, the Launceston Examiner reports :—' A quantity of iron has been run off most successfully at the works of the Ilfracombe Iron Company. The furnace answered admirably. The company begins work with unexceptional [sic] prospects.' " There seems to have been nothing corresponding to it, in the local press in Northern Tasmania.This would be the beginnings of the mystery surrounding the first iron production of Ilfracombe Iron Company.
A few days later, a telegram received from the manager of the I.I.C. read, "George Town, Nov. 28 Twelve pigs Ilfracombe iron shipped per Tamar. Everything progressing well." A local newspaper, the Launceston Examiner, expanded on this announcement by adding, "We believe the weight of the above is about two tons, and that the furnace was tapped on Thursday afternoon, a telegram having been sent to Mr Major that evening, asking him to arrange for shipping it by the Tamar, on her outward trip yesterday." This seemed to be incompatible with the earlier announcement in Melbourne on 24 November 1873, and appears to be the first time that success was announced in Tasmania.
Arrangements had been made to load the pigs onto the steamer Tamar, as she passed down the Tamar River from Launceston, en-route to Melbourne, on 28 November 1873. Presumably, that was done by loading the pigs at the Ilfracombe Company's jetty. It seems that James Major accompanied the pigs to Melbourne, arriving on 29 November 1873, perhaps intending show off the iron to Victorian shareholders and others.
It was soon apparent that the furnace had not stayed in service, as would be usual once production of iron had commenced.
An optimistic report appeared, on 20 December 1873, stating that production had recommenced. It was reported—presumably based on a communication with the company—that, "The new vertical iron cylinders at the Ilfracombe Iron Company's works have been completed, and found to answer admirably. The necessary repairs to the furnace have been carried out, and fire-bricks of the proper description substituted for the inferior ones which were at first unwittingly put in, and active operations were commenced last Tuesday" [16 December 1874].
However, on the same day as that report of production commencing, 20 December 1873, a prominent shareholder, Ayde Douglas, was on his way to the site to meet Major and Longden and find out for himself what was happening.
Another attempt at smelting took place on 23 December 1873, using still larger blast cylinders made of wood at the site, after which the furnace was never relit.
Demise and sale of assets
The company had exhausted its capital, wasting some of it on assets that it never put to use, such as its waterwheel. After the failure of attempts to smelt on 16 and 23 December 1873, it became apparent that a larger blast engine and larger blowing cylinders were necessary and would require more capital. The company also had a debt to the Oriental Bank.
It was decided to create a new company of larger capital, and issue new shares to existing shareholders in exchange for the old company's assets. This suited Longden and Major, who were unable to participate in any other kind of restructure, as both had run out of money by this time. However, the Oriental Bank took legal action to prevent the new company being formed and to secure repayment of its loan. An order went to the sheriff to sell off the assets.
There was no auction but the assets were sold to Ayde Douglas for £805, roughly the amount owed to the bank. Douglas had secured the assets cheaply, but the other shareholders' interests were wiped out. The waterwheel was sold off and ended up powering a stamper battery at the Leura Mine.
The low-key sale and the shunning of Major and Longden hints at conflict among the shareholders; it is likely that, as the people managing the site work and operations, Major and Longden were seen as responsible for the failure to enter production.
As the price of iron was still high at the time of the sale, Douglas probably intended to restart the works, but the iron price later collapsed. The furnace site was abandoned.
Controversy
The first hint that the Ilfracombe Iron Company may have been concealing something about the outcome of its iron smelting came in an editorial, by T.C.Just, in the newspaper the Cornwall Chronicle,(also reprinted as an article in the Tasmanian), in December 1874. It read, "It is just twelve months since we recorded the partial success of the Ilfracombe Iron Company, in smelting pig iron from the ore found on their property. We afterwards learnt, however, that this iron had not been fairly produced by any ordinary furnace process, and the subsequent collapse of the company showed this to be only too true. When attempts were made to produce the article in bulk from the large furnace, they utterly failed".
The announcement by telegram, on 28 November 1873, had merely said that, "Twelve pigs Ilfracombe iron shipped per Tamar"—making no mention of the furnace—but the obvious assumption was that the iron had come from the company's blast furnace. In any case, the day after the telegram, the pigs were on the sea en route for Melbourne; there was virtually no opportunity for locals to see the pigs before they disappeared from the district. And, unusually, the blast furnace did not remain in continuous production after its supposed first tapping.
If the twelve pigs (two tons) of iron despatched in November 1873 on the s.s. Tamar had not come from the furnace—since no other furnace was working nearby—the pigs would either be Ilfracombe iron smelted from its ore elsewhere—like the iron smelted in Melbourne in November 1872—or not Ilfracombe iron at all.
If the iron was from another source—even allowing for the relatively remote location of the blast furnace—it would have been an elaborate deception, necessitating the involvement of at least some of the company's staff and management. The unlikelihood of such a deception has led some historians to dismiss Just's editorial; one seeing it as a "political statement", by Just who was a shareholder in the rival British and Tasmanian Charcoal Iron Company.
However, four different experts—examining the furnace ruin in 1883, 1982, 1988, and 2012—failed to find any iron in the hearth of the old blast furnace. An unused cast iron tapping block from the furnace also survives; perhaps that block was a spare, but the absence of iron in the hearth is far harder to explain. It therefore seems possible that the ongoing problem with the furnace—a mismatch between the relatively small capacity of the blast machinery and the size of the furnace—was enough to prevent the furnace reaching a suitable temperature to smelt iron ore and produce molten pig-iron. If so, the well-made furnace could never have produced any iron.
Against this conclusion there is but one piece of physical evidence; an archaeological research map of the blast furnace site shows a 'bosh skull' located nearby to the furnace ruin. A bosh skull is a mass of solidified iron and slag. If it exists at the remote site, the bosh skull could only have come from the furnace. However, even this does not prove conclusively that the furnace made molten pig iron that was successfully tapped, on 27 November 1873. All that is known for certain is that the second and third attempts to smelt iron—on 16 and 23 December 1873—both failed. These were the last attempts made, because the company afterwards ran out of money.
It seems that the telegram announcement of 28 November 1873 was, most probably, part of a deliberate attempt to mislead—designed to help attract the additional capital that the company so desperately needed—as was the subsequent report of production recommencing in December 1873.
Technology
Process and equipment
Blast furnace
The furnace was an open-top, cold-blast furnace. It was described, in an article in the Launceston Examiner of 20 September 1873, as follows, "The foundation of the furnace is laid in concrete 4 feet deep, on the top of this is 6 feet 6 in. of solid substantial masonry. The masonry consists of four grand arches in the form of a cross, thus constituting a compact block 14 feet square the arches being used instead of building the block quite solid, in order to lessen the chances of the damp ascending into the body of the furnace. On the top of this masonry a large boiler plate cylinder 10 feet in diameter is erected, with a strong heavy cast iron ring at the base, from which through the masonry into the foundation holding down bolts are passed and fastened, thus firmly securing the upright cylinder." The iron shell was lined with firebricks.
The furnace had provision for conversion to recycle the off-gases to heat the blast, although no stoves to heat the blast were ever built. This suggests another probable reason for its failure; a furnace and blower possibly sized for hot-blast operation, but used as a cold-blast furnace.
A casting shed 95 feet long by 30 feet wide, with a wooden shingled roof was constructed; it was expected that casting of pig iron would occur every 12-hours.
Blast machinery
The blowing cylinders were made by Messrs Robertson Bros. of Melbourne. The equipment was described, in an article in the Launceston Examiner of 20 September 1873, as follows, "double cylinders 15 inches in diameter, 24 inches stroke, having a minimum velocity of 60 strokes per minute, and discharge the air into a large wrought iron receiver, capable of contaiting 128 cubic feet, and thence. through the tuyeres into the furnace".
The original plan was for this blast machinery would be powered by a waterwheel but in fact all actual operation of the furnace used steam power. It was powered first by a steam engine that had been hired for the purpose but proved too small. Later a larger engine was used, but it apparently it—or the blast cylinders themselves—was too small as well.
Dam and waterwheel
The plant was intended to make use of water power. A dam was constructed across Snowey's Creek, a perennial stream. The dam was about half a mile from the furnace and had a 50-foot wall. The water passed through a channel and into a flume with a fall of 97 feet. About halfway along the flume, a smaller horizontal waterwheel powered a sawmill, with the water continuing in the remaining part of the flume to the main waterwheel. After the waterwheel, the water ran through an underground passage to flow into the creek.
The waterwheel stood 120 feet from the furnace. It was 30 feet in diameter and 4 feet wide, with 64 buckets and heavy cast-iron bosses 3 feet in diameter through which the shaft passed. This large waterwheel apparently was never used by the Ilfracombe Iron Co. but was later used to power a gold mine stamper battery.
Charcoal kilns
There were two charcoal kilns, halfway between the dam and the furnace, each 200 feet long by 20 feet wide. The walls and roof were of sod, with cast-iron portholes along the sides to maintain the necessary restricted air flow for the charcoal-burning process.
Transport
Tramway
There was a disused timber tramway for the former Ilfracombe saw-mill, which conveniently ran alongside the iron ore deposit. It had been laid down in 1857 and become overgrown and rotten by the 1870s, so the track needed total reconstruction. At the river end, it needed extension to the north to the site of the new jetty.
The new tramway was horse-drawn and had wooden rails of 3-inch × 2-inch timber set at 3-foot gauge.
Jetty
The original jetty that was the terminus of the timber-haulage tramway was further south from where the I. I. C. built its new jetty. The choice of the site of the new jetty was a good one, as the new jetty could—with some extension—reach water 30 feet deep, enough to accommodate a 500 ton ship.
The jetty was described as, "a substantial jetty, 133ft long by 15ft wide" and "built of stone and logs". The tramway ran over the length of the jetty and connected it to the smelter site.
Legacy and remnants
The ruin of the blast furnace lies on private property. It is only one of three 19th-Century blast furnace ruins in Australia, and the only one in Tasmania. It is the only such ruin with an iron outer-shell.
Approximately three metres of the lowest part of the blast furnace is still standing; the stone base and hearth—including the three tuyere ports and the three tuyere pipes—and the lowest part of the iron shell are in place. Lying on the ground, adjacent to the furnace, is the iron shell from the collapsed upper part of the furnace, which sheared off the furnace structure when a large tree fell on it. The fallen tree lay over the furnace in 1969 but is now gone. The area immediately adjacent to the furnace base is strewn with fire bricks. An unused cast iron tapping block from the old furnace survives and is on display at the Beaconsfield Mine & Heritage Centre.
The iron ore mining site is close by, as are the sites of the dam and the waterwheel, both of which can still be identified.
No trace exists of the Ilfracombe Iron Company's jetty on the Tamar River. Its former site is close to the Australian Maritime College's training facility at Beauty Point.
The pattern for plaques intended to commemorate the aborted casting of pig-iron in "October 1873" is in the Queen Victoria Museum & Art Gallery, in Launceston.
A replica of the iron bell that was shown at the Vienna Exposition of 1873 was cast in Tasmania in 2017; it is on display at the Beaconsfield Mine & Heritage Centre. On its rim, the bell has cast lettering reading "Ilfracombe Iron Company".

Intonjutsu (隠遁術 lit. Kanji for "disappearing technique") is the ninja art of "disappearing" and has many walking and stealth techniques. It also comprises wilderness survival, fieldcraft, and Shinobi-aruki (silent movement steps and leaps).

Iron ores are rocks and minerals from which metallic iron can be economically extracted. The ores are usually rich in iron oxides and vary in color from dark grey, bright yellow, or deep purple to rusty red. The iron is usually found in the form of magnetite (Fe3O4, 72.4% Fe), hematite (Fe2O3, 69.9% Fe), goethite (FeO(OH), 62.9% Fe), limonite (FeO(OH)·n(H2O), 55% Fe), or siderite (FeCO3, 48.2% Fe).
Ores containing very high quantities of hematite or magnetite (typically greater than about 60% iron) are known as natural ore or direct shipping ore, and can be fed directly into iron-making blast furnaces. Iron ore is the raw material used to make pig iron, which is one of the primary raw materials to make steel — 98% of the mined iron ore is used to make steel. In 2011 the Financial Times quoted Christopher LaFemina, mining analyst at Barclays Capital, saying that iron ore is "more integral to the global economy than any other commodity, except perhaps oil".

Iron-rich sedimentary rocks are sedimentary rocks which contain 15 wt.% or more iron. However, most sedimentary rocks contain iron in varying degrees. The majority of these rocks were deposited during specific geologic time periods: The Precambrian (3800 to 539 million years ago), the early Paleozoic (539 to 419 million years ago), and the middle to late Mesozoic (205 to 66 million years ago). Overall, they make up a very small portion of the total sedimentary record.
Iron-rich sedimentary rocks have economic uses as iron ores. Iron deposits have been located on all major continents with the exception of Antarctica. They are a major source of iron and are mined for commercial use. The main iron ores are from the oxide group consisting of hematite, goethite, and magnetite. The carbonate siderite is also typically mined. A productive belt of iron formations is known as an iron range.
Classification
The accepted classification scheme for iron-rich sedimentary rocks is to divide them into two sections: ironstones and iron formations
Ironstones
Ironstones consist of 15% iron or more in composition. This is necessary for the rock to even be considered an iron-rich sedimentary rock. Generally, they are from the Phanerozoic which means that they range in age from the present to 540 million years ago. They can contain iron minerals from the following groups: oxides, carbonates, and silicates. Some examples of minerals in iron-rich rocks containing oxides are limonite, hematite, and magnetite. An example of a mineral in iron-rich rock containing carbonates is siderite and an example of minerals in an iron-rich rock containing silicate is chamosite. They are often interbedded with limestones, shales, and fine-grained sandstones. They are typically nonbanded, however they can be very coarsely banded on occasion. They are hard and non-cherty. The components of the rock range in size from sand to mud, but do not contain a lot of silica. They are also more aluminous. They are not laminated and sometimes contain ooids. Ooids can be a distinct characteristic though they are not normally a main component of ironstones. Within ironstones, ooids are made up of iron silicates and/or iron oxides and sometimes occur in alternating laminae. They normally contain fossil debris and sometimes the fossils are partly or entirely replaced by iron minerals. A good example of this is pyritization. They are smaller in size and less likely to be deformed or metamorphosed than iron formations. The term iron ball is occasionally used to describe an ironstone nodule.
Iron formations
Iron formations must be at least 15% iron in composition, just like ironstones and all iron-rich sedimentary rocks. However, iron formations are mainly Precambrian in age which means that they are 4600 to 590 million years old. They are much older than ironstones. They tend to be cherty, though chert can not be used as a way to classify iron formations because it is a common component in many types of rocks. They are well banded and the banding can be anywhere from a few millimeters to tens of meters thick. The layers have very distinct banded successions that are made up of iron rich layers that alternate with layers of chert. Iron formations are often associates with dolomite, quartz-rich sandstone, and black shale. They sometimes grade locally into chert or dolomite. They can have many different textures that resemble limestone. Some of these textures are micritic, pelleted, intraclastic, peloidal, oolitic, pisolitic, and stromatolitic. In low-grade iron formations, there are different dominant minerals dependent on the different types of facies. The dominant minerals in the oxide facies are magnetite and hematite. The dominant minerals in the silicate facies are greenalite, minnesotaite, and glauconite. The dominant mineral in the carbonate facies is siderite. The dominant mineral in the sulfide facies is pyrite. Most iron formations are deformed or metamorphosed simply due to their incredibly old age, but they still retain their unique distinctive chemical composition; even at high metamorphic grades. The higher the grade, the more metamorphosed it is. Low grade rocks may only be compacted while high grade rocks often can not be identified. They often contain a mixture of banded iron formations and granular iron formations. Iron formations can be divided into subdivisions known as: banded iron formations (BIFs) and granular iron formations (GIFs).
The above classification scheme is the most commonly used and accepted, though sometimes an older system is used which divides iron-rich sedimentary rocks into three categories: bog iron deposits, ironstones, and iron formations. A bog-iron deposit is iron that formed in a bog or swamp through the process of oxidation.
Banded iron formations vs. granular iron formations
Banded iron formations
Banded iron formations (BIFs) were originally chemical muds and contain well developed thin lamination. They are able to have this lamination due to the lack of burrowers in the Precambrian. BIFs show regular alternating layers that are rich in iron and chert that range in thickness from a few millimeters to a few centimeters. The formation can continue uninterrupted for tens to hundreds of meters stratigraphically. These formations can contain sedimentary structures like cross-bedding, graded bedding, load casts, ripple marks, mud cracks, and erosion channels. In comparison to GIFs, BIFs contain a much larger spectrum of iron minerals, have more reduced facies, and are more abundant.
BIFs are divided into type categories based on the characteristics related to the nature of their formation and unique physical and chemical properties. Some categories of banded iron formations are the Rapitan type, the Algoma type, and the Superior type.
Rapitan type
Rapitan types are associated with the glaciogenic sequences of the Archean and Early Proterozoic. The type is distinctive as the hydrothermal-input has notably less influence on this formation's Rare Earth Element (REE) chemistry than other formations during this time period.
Algoma type
Algoma types are small lenticular iron deposits that are associated with volcanic rocks and turbidites. Iron content in this class type rarely exceeds 1010 tons. They range in thickness from 10–100 meters. Deposition occurs in island arc/back arc basins and intracratonic rift zones.
Superior type
Superior types are large, thick, extensive iron deposits across stable shelves and in broad basins. Total iron content in this class type exceeds 1013 tons. They can extend to over 105 kilometers2. Deposition occurs in relatively shallow marine conditions under transgressing seas.
Granular iron formations
Granular iron formations (GIFs) were originally well-sorted chemical sands. They lack even, continuous bedding that takes the form of discontinuous layers. Discontinuous layers likely represent bedforms that were generated by storm waves and currents. Any layers that are thicker than a few meters and are uninterrupted, are rare for GIFs. They contain sand-sized clasts and a finer grained matrix, and generally belong to the oxide or silicate mineral facies.
Depositional environment
There are four facies types associated with iron-rich sedimentary rocks: oxide-, silicate-, carbonate-, and sulfide-facies. These facies correspond to water depth in a marine environment. Oxide-facies are precipitated under the most oxidizing conditions. Silicate- and carbonate-facies are precipitated under intermediate redox conditions. Sulfide-facies are precipitated under the most reducing conditions. There is a lack of iron-rich sedimentary rocks in shallow waters which leads to the conclusion that the depositional environment ranges from the continental shelf and upper continental slope to the abyssal plain. (The diagram does not have the abyssal plain labeled, but this would be located to the far right of the diagram at the bottom of the ocean).
Chemical reactions
Ferrous and ferric iron are components in many minerals, especially within sandstones. Fe2+ is in clay, carbonates, sulfides, and is even within feldspars in small amounts. Fe3+ is in oxides, hydrous, anhydrous, and in glauconites. Commonly, the presence of iron is determined to be within a rock due to certain colorations from oxidation. Oxidation is the loss of electrons from an element. Oxidation can occur from bacteria or by chemical oxidation. This often happens when ferrous ions come into contact with water (due to dissolved oxygen within surface waters) and a water-mineral reaction occurs.
The formula for the oxidation/reduction of iron is:
Fe2+ ↔ Fe3+ + e−
The formula works for oxidation to the right or reduction to the left.
Fe2+ is the ferrous form of iron. This form of iron gives up electrons easily and is a mild reducing agent. These compounds are more soluble because they are more mobile. Fe3+ is the ferric form of iron. This form of iron is very stable structurally because its valence electron shell is half filled.
Laterization
Laterization is a soil forming process that occurs in warm and moist climates under broadleaf evergreen forests. Soils formed by laterization tend to be highly weathered with high iron and aluminium oxide content. Goethite is often made from this process and is a major source of iron in sediments. However, once it is deposited it must be dehydrated in order to come to an equilibrium with hematite. The dehydration reaction is:
2 FeO(OH) → Fe2O3 + H2O
Pyritization
Pyritization is discriminatory. It rarely happens to soft tissue organisms and aragonitic fossils are more susceptible to it than calcite fossils. It commonly takes place in marine depositional environments where there is organic material. The process is caused by sulfate reduction which replaces carbonate skeletons (or shells) with pyrite (FeS2). It generally does not preserve detail and the pyrite forms within the structure as many microcrystals. In freshwater environments, siderite will replace carbonate shells instead of pyrite due to the low amounts of sulfate. The amount of pyritization that has taken place within a fossil may sometimes be referred to as degree of pyritization (DOP).
Iron minerals
Ankerite (Ca(Mg,Fe)(CO3)2) and siderite (FeCO3) are carbonates and favor alkaline, reducing conditions. They commonly occur as concretions in mudstones and siltstones.
Pyrite and marcasite (FeS2) are sulfide minerals and favor reducing conditions. They are the most common in fine-grained, dark colored mudstones.
Hematite (Fe2O3) is usually the pigment in red beds and requires oxidizing conditions.
Limonite (2Fe2O3·3H2O) is used for unidentified massive hydroxides and oxides of iron.
Iron–rich rocks in thin section
Magnetite and hematite are opaque under the microscope under transmitted light. Under reflected light, magnetite shows up as metallic and a silver or black color. Hematite will be a more reddish-yellow color. Pyrite is seen as opaque, a yellow-gold color, and metallic. Chamosite is an olive-green color in thin section that readily oxidizes to limonite. When it is partially or fully oxidized to limonite, the green color becomes a yellowish-brown. Limonite is opaque under the microscope as well. Chamosite is an iron silicate and it has a birefringence of almost zero. Siderite is an iron carbonate and it has a very high birefringence. The thin sections often reveal marine fauna within oolitic ironstones. In older samples, the ooids may be squished and have hooked tails on either end due to compaction.

Ironsand, also known as iron-sand or iron sand, is a type of sand with heavy concentrations of iron. It is typically dark grey or blackish in color.
It is composed mainly of magnetite, Fe3O4, and also contains small amounts of titanium, silica, manganese, calcium and vanadium.
Ironsand has a tendency to heat up in direct sunlight, causing temperatures high enough to cause minor burns. As such it forms a hazard in New Zealand at popular west-coast surf beaches such as Piha.
Occurrence
Ironsand is found worldwide. Although the iron mineral composition of the ironsand is mostly magnetite, the sand is usually mixed with other types of sand that wash downriver or ashore from mountainous or underwater deposits. The exact composition of the sand mixture may vary drastically even in the same geographic region. In some areas the sand may contain mostly quartz, while in others the sand may be made primarily from volcanic rock such as basalt, depending on the types of minerals along the water's path. The ironsand is typically picked up along the way from beds, veins, or inclusions of magnetite, which may originate a great distance from the sand deposits, and washed downstream or along the currents with the rest of the sand. Being heavier than the other sands, it is often deposited in areas where the water experiences a sudden change in direction or speed, such as the widening of a river or where the waves ebb and flow against the shoreline.
The ironsand is mixed with the other sands as small grains of black or dark-blue magnetite. Sand used for mining typically had anywhere from 19% magnetite to as low as 2%. The ironsand typically had to be separated from the sand mixture. Because the magnetite is usually heavier than quartz, feldspar, or other minerals, separation was usually done by washing it in sluice boxes (a method similar to gold panning but on a larger scale). Sluice separation typically yielded concentrations of magnetite ranging from 30 to 50%, depending on the type of sand and the method used. In the early 20th century a process of magnetic separation was developed that could produce concentrations as high as 70%. Once concentrated, the magnetite grains could then be smelted into various forms of iron. However, the loose, granular nature of the ore was difficult to keep contained in common bloomeries or blast furnaces, having a tendency toward granular flow (mimicking a liquid at larger scales) and was easily blown away by the bellow blasts, so was impossible to process using common methods of iron or steel production. Thus, innovative methods of smelting the ore were developed. The magnetite grains, however, often contain other metal impurities, such as chromium, arsenic, or titanium. Due to the nature of the sand, the mining operations were rarely stationary, but frequently moved from place to place.
Asia
Historically, ironsand was predominantly used in East Asian cultures; most notably in China and Japan.
China
Ironsand had moderate, localized uses in China during the late Industrial Revolution, but was a rather unimportant commodity throughout the long history of the Chinese iron-industry. Unlike the rest of Eurasia and Africa, there is very little archeological evidence to suggest that bloomery smelting was used in ancient China. The Chinese countryside was rich in deposits that contained both coal, a fuel that burns at a high temperature, and an iron ore containing a high content of phosphorus. Around 1200 BCE the Chinese developed a method of smelting the rocky ore into pig iron, which was then remelted and poured into molds (cast) to form cast iron. Although the metal was very brittle, this method was able to produce iron in much greater volumes than bloomery smelting, and with vastly higher yields of metal per ore. By the 1st century BCE the Chinese iron-industry was by far the largest and most advanced in the world. By the 1st century AD they had developed puddling for the production of mild steel, crucible steel for the manufacture of swords and other weapons, and a chemical process of rapidly decarburizing liquid pig-iron to make wrought iron, using the oxidation properties of saltpeter (called the Heaton process, it was independently discovered by John Heaton in the 1860s). China remained the world's largest producer of iron until the 11th century, manufacturing large quantities of relatively affordable steel and iron.
Donald B Wagner, an expert in ancient Chinese metallurgy, notes that attempts to trace the history of ironsand in China end with inconclusive results. One source may indicate its use as early as the Tang Dynasty (~700-900 CE) while others seem to contradict this interpretation. Due to wars, invasions, famines, distrust of the government, overpopulation, a rising opium epidemic, and clashes between various tongs of miners, very little information exists about the industry between the 11th century and the 19th century, when a European miner named Felix Tegengren arrived to find the Chinese industry in shambles. Tegengren notes that ironsand was sluice mined in Henan and Fujian by local farmers and smelted over charcoal fires to make tools, but it involved a lot of work, which made it very expensive. It was only smelted where there was enough wood for the fires and cheaper steel was not readily available. Therefore, the material was considered to be economically unimportant in China. However, because the mining was safe, outdoor work, it was practiced by local farmers to supplement their income wherever it was available; in the 19th century 1,000 lb (450 kg) of sluiced sand typically sold for the equivalent of 50 to 60 US dollars (by 2016 exchange rates ~ 900–1000 dollars or 700–800 euros).
However, in the modern age ironsand is placer mined along China's southeast coast and used for smelting steel. The typical composition of this ironsand is 48.88% metallic iron, 25.84% silica, 0.232% phosphorus, and 0.052% sulfur.
Indonesia
In Indonesia, iron sand is prevalent on the south coast of Java island.
Japan
Large scale mining was not practiced in Japan until the 7th or 8th centuries. Prior to this, metals were commonly imported into Japan from China and Korea. Deposits of iron ore are thought to have been scarce in Japan, so, around the 8th century, iron-making technology developed with the use of ironsand (satetsu) as the raw ingredient. Because of the loose nature of the sand, it is difficult to smelt in a normal bloomery, or to use in a blast furnace to make pig iron, so the Japanese developed an open-topped bloomery called a tatara. The tatara was built with a low, tub-like shape, resembling a horizontal blast-furnace, into which ironsand could be poured and contained, and smelted in stages. Unlike with other methods, the charcoal was piled on top of the sand and smelted from above, keeping it from being blown about by the blasts from the bellows. Instead of brick or stone, the tatara was made of clay so that it could simply be broken apart to extract the metal bloom. This method allowed smelting of much higher volumes of ore than other types of bloomery smelting.
The ironsand in Japan comes in two forms. Masa ironsand is found mixed with quartz sand that washes down from granite mountains. The magnetite in the sand contains few impurities or other metal oxides. Masa ironsand was used for manufacturing wrought iron and steel, used in everything from tools to cookware. Ironsand was used extensively in Japan for iron production, especially for traditional Japanese swords. Akome ironsand is found mixed with sand made from an igneous rock called diorite. The magnetite in the sand contains often greater than 5% titanium dioxide, which lowers the smelting temperature. The akome ironsand is used in the tatara to make pig iron, which is then used to make items out of cast iron (nabegane). In the manufacture of steel, the akome was added to the tatara during the initial stage of smelting, acting as a binder and catalyst for steel production, upon which the masa ironsand was poured during further stages. When smelted for pig iron, 1,000 lb (450 kg) or 120 kanme) typically yielded about 200 lb (91 kg) of pig iron, 20 lb (9.1 kg) of steel, and 70 lb (32 kg) of slag. When smelted for steel, 1,000 lb (450 kg) of sand yielded about 100 lb (45 kg) of steel, 100 lb (45 kg) of slag, and 90 lb (41 kg) of pig iron. Slag and pig iron that were not suitable for use were then melted together to form wrought iron, of which 1,000 lb (450 kg) mixed produced about 500 lb (230 kg) of iron.
Europe
Ironsand is found many places in Europe, although it was rarely used for smelting. It is often found in association with volcanic or basaltic sands. For example, it is found in Tenerife, Spain, where the magnetite grains contain a very high amount of titanium and other impurities. The typical composition is 79.2% iron oxide, 14.6% titanium dioxide, 1.6% manganese oxide, 0.8% silica and aluminum oxide, and trace amounts of chromium. It can also be found in the River Dee, in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, containing 85.3% iron oxide, 9.5% titanium dioxide, 1.0% arsenic, and 1.5% silica and aluminum oxide.
New Zealand
Ironsand occurs extensively on the west coast of New Zealand's North Island. The sand makes up a large portion of the black-sand beaches on the North Island, as well as the surrounding sea floor. The magnetite in the sand contains fairly large quantities of titanium, and is sometimes referred to as titanomagnetite. It was produced from volcanic eruptions that occurred in the Pleistocene epoch, and is formed due to the oceanic erosion of the volcanic rock which is washed ashore by the waves to form the dunes of the black beaches. The magnetite is mixed with sand made from andesite and rhyolite. The sand mixture typically contains 5 to 40% magnetite.
New Zealand had limited deposits of iron ore, but the deposits of ironsand were massive. It had been used by some early settlers to manufacture steel and pig iron, but the material could not be smelted in common bloomeries or blast furnaces. A few smelting companies formed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but were unable to process the ore with any economic success due to the sandy nature and high titanium content, which tended to form hard, brittle carbides in the steel. In 1939, a commission was formed to study the properties of the ore and devise a way of smelting it on an industrial scale. The commission determined that, by sintering the sand into bigger chunks or pellets, the problems of smelting the sand in a blast furnace could be eliminated. However, at that time World War II began, and thus further development was suspended and did not resume until the late 1960s, producing the first output of steel in 1969.
Ironsand is placer mined from Waikato North Head. 1.2 million tonnes is used by New Zealand Steel to create steel, in a unique manufacturing process. Mining at Taharoa produces up to 4 million tonnes for export. A previous mine existed at Waipipi in South Taranaki. A proposal by Iron Ore NZ Ltd. for further ironsand mining off the coast of Taranaki faced resistance from some Māori and others in 2005 in the wake of the New Zealand foreshore and seabed controversy. A large quantity of it is shipped to China and Japan, but by 2011 New Zealand's sole manufacturing plant was producing 650,000 metric tons of steel and iron per year. New Zealand is the only country to use ironsand for industrial smelting. The typical composition of the magnetite is 82% iron oxide, 8% titanium dioxide and 8% silica; 0.015% sulfur, and 0.015% phosphorus. In 100% concentrations of magnetite this had a maximum potential to yield ~ 58% metallic iron, although the titanium is unrecoverable by modern techniques.
United States
Ironsand is found extensively around the US, especially in the area of New York, Southern California, New England, and the Great Lakes, where it is often mixed with a feldspar sand and sometimes bright grains of garnet. The magnetite from these areas often contains high amounts of chromium and titanium. In the 19th century ironsand was sometimes used as blotter sand for concrete and masonry work, or more rarely as raw material for steel production; one blacksmith in Connecticut used it for making bar stock.
History
According to the OED online entry for sand-iron, Jedidiah Morse (1761–1826), writing in The American universal geography (new edition, 1796 (2 vols)), stated that Jared Eliot (1685-1763) invented sand-iron, or the making of iron from black sand, in 1761.
However, Japanese craftsmen have been using sand-iron in sword-making for at least 1200 years. The crafting of sand-iron in "tatara" smelters, made of brick and clay, is still practiced by Japanese craftsmen today.

Ironstone is a sedimentary rock, either deposited directly as a ferruginous sediment or created by chemical replacement, that contains a substantial proportion of an iron ore compound from which iron (Fe) can be smelted commercially.
Not to be confused with native or telluric iron, which is very rare and found in metallic form, the term ironstone is customarily restricted to hard, coarsely banded, non-banded, and non-cherty sedimentary rocks of post-Precambrian age. The Precambrian deposits, which have a different origin, are generally known as banded iron formations. The iron minerals comprising ironstones can consist either of oxides, i.e. limonite, hematite, and magnetite; carbonates, i.e. siderite; silicates, i.e. chamosite; or some combination of these minerals.
Description
Freshly cleaved ironstone is usually grey. The brown external appearance is due to oxidation of its surface.
Ironstone, being a sedimentary rock is not always homogeneous, and can be found in a red-and-black banded form called tiger iron, sometimes used for jewelry purposes.
Sometimes ironstone hosts concretions or opal gems.
Occurrence
Ironstone occurs in a variety of forms. The various forms of ironstone include siderite nodules; deeply weathered saprolite, i.e. (laterite); and ooidal ironstone.
Uses
Ironstone as a source of iron
Ironstone, although widespread, is a limited source of iron. Historically, most British iron originated from ironstone, but it is now rarely used for this purpose because it is far too limited in quantity to be an economic source of iron ore.
Ceramics
Ironstone's oxide impurities render it useless as a component in ceramics: the "ironstone china" of Staffordshire and American manufacture, a fine, white, high-fired vitreous semi-porcelain, commonly used for heavy-duty dinner services in the 19th century, includes no ironstone in its production. Its "iron" quality is in its resistance to chipping.
In construction
The stone can be used as a building material. Examples include the parish churches at Kirby Bellars and South Croxton in Leicestershire, and Eydon Hall in Northamptonshire.
In art
Sculptures carved out of ironstone are rare. One example is Henry Moore's Head created in 1930.

The Jones Mill Site, designated by the Smithsonian trinomial 3HS28, is a prehistoric archaeological site near Jones Mill in Hot Spring County, Arkansas. It is a deeply stratified site, with evidence of human habitation in at least three different time periods. It is one of the few documented Archaic sites in the region, with evidence of human activity dating to 3000 BCE. It is located near documented prehistoric stone quarry sites, and finds at the site include extensive stone tool construction artifacts.
The site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1988.

A Kaldo converter (using the Kaldo process or Stora-Kaldo process) is a rotary vessel oxygen based metal refining method. Originally applied to the refining of iron into steel, with most installations in the 1960s, the process is (2014) used primarily to refine non ferrous metals, typically copper. In that field, it is often named TBRC, or Top Blown Rotary Converter.
History and description
Steel production
The name "Kaldo" is derived from Prof. Bo Kalling, and from the Domnarvets Jernverk (Stora Kopparbergs Bergslag subsidiary) both key in the development of the process. Research into the use of a stirring to promote mixing, and therefore rate of conversion was investigated from the 1940s, and investigations into the use of oxygen began c.1948. The feedstock at the Domnarvet works had a phosphorus content of 1.8-2.0% and so the process was developed with one aim being dephosphorisation. The first production unit was installed in 1954 at Domnarvet Jernverk.
The converter was a top blow oxygen converter, similar to Linz-Donawitz (LD) type, using a cylindrical vessel; the vessel was tilted whilst conversion took place, with typical rotation speeds of around 30 revolutions per minute; the oxygen was injected via a lance, with slag forming materials added separately.
Kaldo converters were relatively common in the 1960s in the United Kingdom, during the transition from predominately open hearth process steelmaking to oxygen based steelmaking techniques. Converters were installed at Consett steelworks, Park Gate, Rotherham, Shelton works, Stoke-on-Trent; and Stanton Iron Works. Before the advent of the basic-LD process the Kaldo method was a preferred one in the UK for converting high phosphorus iron. The first unit in the UK was at Park Gate Works, Rotherham.
In the USA, the process was installed at the Sharon Steel Corporation (c.1962). A plant in Japan was installed for Sanyo Special Steel Co. (Himejii) in c.1965. A combined type of converter (LD-Kaldo), using elements of the Linz-Donawitz (LD) and Kaldo processes was installed 1965 in Belgium at Cockerill-Ougrée-Providence's plant in Marchienne-au-Pont as a multicompany research venture. In France, one Kaldo furnace was also installed (one 160t unit, 1960) at Sollac's Florange steelworks. It was followed in 1969 by two huge 240t units, the biggest Kaldo converters ever built (two times bigger than the previous bigger ones : 1000t rotating at 30 r.p.m. !), at de Wendel-Sidelor's (later Usinor-Sacilor) Gandrage-Rombas steelworks (Lorraine, France); these two converters did not meet expectations and the third additional planned Kaldo unit was not installed, instead two OLP (oxygène-lance-poudre) 240t units were used.
Disadvantages of the process, compared to non-rotating oxygen furnaces (e.g. LD type) were the higher capital cost, more difficult to upscale to higher outputs, and additional complexity (i.e. rotating parts and loading thereof). Advantages included the ability to use a high proportion of scrap metal, and good controllability of final steel specification. At the Park Gate works conversion time was 90 minutes, with up to 45% scrap loading, with a capacity of 75t in a 500t total, 16 feet (4.9 m) diameter converter, with a rotation speed of 40 revs per minute.
Due to high maintenance costs the Kaldo converter did not gain widespread usage in the steel industry, with non-rotating converters being preferred.
Non-ferrous production
Nickel matte was converted by Inco (Canada) in a pilot Kaldo converter in 1959, and Metallo-Chimique (Belgium) developed secondary copper smelting using the Kaldo type converters in the late 1960s. The Kaldo type converted is commonly known as a Top-Blown Rotary Converter (TBRC) in non-ferrous metal smelting terminology.
By the 1970s, the Kaldo furnace was in common use for copper and nickel smelting. A Kaldo converter for the smelting of lead was constructed by Boliden AB in Sweden in 1976.
Kaldo secondary copper units were still in use worldwide at the beginning of the 21st century, but as of 2011 no new units had been commissioned for around 10 years, suggesting that the process had been superseded.

Kangina (Dari: کنگینه, lit. 'treasure'), also called Gangina, is the traditional Afghan technique of preserving fresh fruit, particularly grapes, in airtight discs formed from mud and straw. The centuries-old technique is indigenous to Afghanistan's rural center and north, where remote communities that cannot import fresh fruit eat kangina-preserved fresh grapes throughout the winter, and merchants use kangina to safely store and transport grapes for sale at market. Grapes preserved using kangina in modern Afghanistan are typically of the thick-skinned Taifi or Kishmishi varieties, which are harvested later in the season and remain fresh in the mud vessels for up to six months.
The method, a form of passive controlled-atmosphere storage, works by sealing fruit in the clay-rich mud, restricting flow of air, moisture and microbes, much as a plastic bag would. Discs are formed from two bowl-shaped pieces, which are sculpted from mud and straw, and baked in the sun before being filled with up to 1–2 kilograms (2.2–4.4 lb) of un-bruised fruit and sealed with more mud. They are kept dry and cool, away from direct sunlight. Gradual permeation of gas through the clay barrier allows oxygen to enter the container, keeping the grapes alive, while the elevated concentration of carbon dioxide inside the package inhibits the grapes' metabolism and prevents the growth of fungus. The grapes are prevented from drying out, and the mud absorbs liquid which would otherwise lead to bacterial and fungal growth.
The practice of storing grapes in mud and straw has been recorded as far back as the 12th century: in his Book of Agriculture, Sevillan agronomist Ibn al-'Awwam noted layering grapes with straw in mud-sealed glass containers or "cowpat bowls" as an extant technique of preservation in Andalusia.
Kangina are inexpensive, eco-friendly, and effective vessels for the preservation of fresh fruit. A 2023 study found kangina and polystyrene foam boxes to be the most effective vessels for preserving grapes. The containers are, however, heavy, unwieldy, and prone to absorbing moisture.

The Kellys Bush Park is a heritage-listed bushland, partly on the former site of smelting works, at Nelson Parade, Hunters Hill in the Municipality of Hunter's Hill local government area of New South Wales, Australia. It is also known as Weil Park and The Smelting Company. The property is owned by Department of Planning and Environment, a department of the Government of New South Wales. It was added to the New South Wales State Heritage Register on 2 April 1999. It is famous for the green ban that was enacted by trade unionists to prevent its destruction.
History
Indigenous history
At the time of European contact the Kelly's bush area was inhabited by the Wallumettagal Clan who spoke the Guringai language. They lived primarily on fish and shellfish, supplementing their diet when necessary with vegetables, marsupials, birds and grubs. They were also frequently observed firing the scrub both to facilitate access to the foreshore and to flush out game. Very little is known of their social structure and religious beliefs.
Development of Hunters Hill
Captain John Hunter (1737–1821) of the Sirius, charted Sydney Harbour in 1788. On 28 January 1788 he wrote in his journal: "A few days after my arrival with the transports in Port Jackson, I set off with a six-oared boat and a small boat, intending to make as good a survey of the harbour as circumstances would admit: I took to my assistance Mr Bradley, the first lieutenant, Mr Keltie, the master, and a young gentleman of the quarter-deck (midshipman Henry Waterhouse)." Hunter's meticulous chart shows 30 depth soundings around the peninsula bounded by the Parramatta and Lane Cove rivers. Hunter was Governor of the Colony from 1795–1800. He is commemorated in the name of Hunters Hill.
In 1855 a speculative housing venture of erecting four prefabricated Swiss Cottages at Hunters Hill was underway. In this period Hunters Hill was an established French enclave, with the residence of the French consul located there at "Passy", and much of its early development was constructed by men of French descent. The prefabricated houses were advertised as "four splendid family residences, standing in their own grounds, of about 1 acres each", with "wood and water in abundance".
Beverley Sherry in her study of Hunter Hill notes that this was the first planned group of houses to be built in the municipality, marking the beginning of the garden suburb character of Australia's oldest Garden Suburb. The subdivision and garden suburb development occurred in the mid to late nineteenth century, predating the formation of the Garden Suburb movement. The historic development at Hunters Hill was consistently speculative, although some of the subdivisions were undertaken to provide residences for family members.
Kelly's Bush
Kelly's Bush derives its name from Mr Thomas H. Kelly who owned over 7.7 hectares (19 acres) of land on the foreshore of Hunter's Hill (stretching from Woolwich Road south to the Parramatta River). This area was bounded by the Parramatta River, Woolwich Road, Nelson Parade and Alfred Street. He established the Smelting Company on seven point seven hectares (nineteen acres) of waterfront land in 1892, with the adjoining seventeen acres of bush to the north designed to act as a buffer to the residential areas and zoned "open space". The smelting company allowed public access to the foreshore for recreation, through all areas except the actual works area. The condition of the surrounding bush fluctuated, depending on the amount of timber being used to fire the smelters.
Almost two point eight hectares (seven acres) of the "open space" became known as Weil Park when it was purchased in 1956 by Hunter's Hill Council and the Cumberland County Council. The bush was cleared and a grassed oval created for sporting activities. In 1966 the Town Clerk wrote to the State Planning Authority stating: "There is insufficient area in the land held and known as Weil Park and Council feels that it is important to the interest of posterity that additional "open space" area should be acquired whilst the opportunity exists".
In 1967 the Smelting Company works moved to Alexandria and AVJennings took a two-year option to purchase the 4.9-hectare (12-acre) site. They applied to Council seeking suspension of the County of Cumberland Planning Scheme Ordinance to enable the development of 147 home units, including three buildings of eight-storeys high. Council was opposed to the application and renewed its bid for State acquisition of the entire area as open space, however the State Planning Authority rejected the proposal. Jennings subsequently submitted a series of modified applications. The Hunters Hill Trust strongly condemned the Jennings development.
The SPA then arranged to buy from Jennings 2.3 hectares (5.6 acres) of sloping waterfront bush and abandoned industrial reserve for a "foreshore reserve". In 1969 the Council agreed in principle to a suspension of the existing zoning to permit the development of 56 townhouses (without any public consultation). This was subsequently reduced to 25 single dwelling allotments.
In an article that appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald on 25 July 1970 local Hunters Hill resident Betty James wrote how local children had pulled up a long line of survey pegs laid out through "their bush" as a heartfelt protest. Her article read like a love-letter to Kelly's Bush, describing its deep gullies of bracken fern, its blueberry ash, lily-pilly, tea tree and a rare stand of healthy banksias. James...also talked about it as an outdoor laboratory and living museum: there were Aboriginal middens and carvings in the sandstone. In September 1970, James and 12 other neighbours gathered at All Saints' parish hall and christened themselves the 'Battlers for Kelly's Bush'. The group, which the Hunters Hill Council would dismiss as "13 bloody housewives", elected James as President, Kath Lehany as secretary and Monica Sheehan as assistant secretary. Most of the women were lifelong Liberal Party voters who had never been involved in politics but each had a different reason for joining...Miriam Cunningham...had realised when she had been to Australia Square, then Sydney's tallest building, that Kellys Bush was the only patch of green she could see on the Parramatta River. "It was the lungs of Sydney.".
A group of concerned citizens had formed by this stage and called themselves "The Battlers".
Unwittingly, the battlers set down a blueprint for the modern-day protest movement. They wrote hundreds of letters. They organised a "phone tree" to pass on news. They invited media to "boil the billy" days in the bush and plied them with baked goods. They ran essay competitions for schoolchildren about why the bush should be saved. They made badges and banners and got their teenagers to hang them around Hunters Hill. They enlisted the local school band, which marched form Hunters Hill High School to Kellys Bush, calling for "browsing not housing". They even roped in local Kylie Tennant to write protest poems. Dinner parties became battlegrounds and the peninsula community divided over the issue. Some wanted the sewage pipes that A.V.Jennings promised to build for the whole area or believed local state Liberal MP Peter Coleman, who said Council rares would drop when Jennings came...Over the course of several months, the battlers sent several delegations to the Liberal Premier of the day, Robert Askin, to argue their case. "Askin derided us as middle-class matrons" says Hunters Hill resident Phil Jenkyn, who says the women inspired him to form a group known as the Defenders of Sydney Harbour Foreshores.
They met with the (then) Premier Robert Askin, asking him to intervene. The Battlers also wrote to the various unions asking for their support and were referred to the Trades and Labour Council.
Despite the protest, in 1971 the Minister for Local Government signed the notice rezoning the land from Reserved Open Space to Residential. The President of the Builders Labourers' Federation of Australia (BLF) met with The Battlers and went to the BLF executive, who supported them in principle. The trade union support resulted in the first "black ban" called on 16 June 1971 by the BLF over an area of land. Black bans would later become known as "green ban" for their active pursuit of the maintenance of green space. Six hundred people attended a rally in August 1971 to demonstrate their support for Kelly's Bush.
In late 1971 a sealed tin box reportedly containing "minutes of an unofficial development committee" and a small bundle of annotated maps was unearthed beneath a uprooted banksia in Kelly’s Bush. Press accounts later referred to initials on the documents matching a then-serving councillor. Its contents have never been made public nor is its current whereabouts publicly known, and some members of the Battlers suspected a coverup of some kind.
With the union green ban in force, A.V. Jennings were eventually forced to sell the land to Hunter's Hill Council, however, by a narrow margin the councillors voted to retain the Residential Zoning. In 1977 the new Premier, Neville Wran, announced that no development would take place at Kelly's Bush. The discovery of radioactive waste on the site raised serious doubts as to its suitability for residential development. A period of silence followed and then in 1983 Neville Wran announced that Kelly's Bush was to be set aside for full public access on a permanent basis. His press release read: "It represents a victory for environmentalists generally. The land will be used to give people access to natural bushland fronting Parramatta River."
The shape of modern Sydney is City of Sydney Labor councillor Meredith Burgmann, who wrote a book on the subject. The movement even inspired overseas activists, including German Petra Kelly, who would eventually form one of the world's first Green political parties.
Mundey and the BLF went on to lead 42 green bans in the early 1970s, holding up billions of dollars' worth of construction.
It took the 13 women 13 years to save Kelly's Bush... When the Wran Government bought the land the women celebrated with a simple bush ceremony and a pot of tea – and invited Jack Mundey, by now their friend for life...Kids still build cubby houses here and roam by foot, bike or in their imagination among the banksias and bracken. Several of the seven dead battlers have had their ashes scattered in the bush....
Description
Kelly's Bush covers 4.8 hectares (12 acres) of bushland on the lower reaches of the Parramatta River in the Sydney Metropolitan Area. It is part of a network of near natural open spaces on the Sydney Harbour waterway system and is the only substantial area of natural bush on the lower Parramatta River. Kelly's Bush is the largest area of near natural bush on the Hunter's Hill peninsula. It is linked directly to Weil Park to the north, Nelson Parade and residential areas to the west, the Parramatta River to the south and residential areas and Woolwich Marina to the east. Kelly's Bush lies on the southerly aspect of the major ridge line of the Hunter's Hill Peninsula, which runs in an east-west direction. There are five major vegetation communities found in Kelly's Bush: eucalyptus (dominant), heath/closed shrub, closed rainforest, banksia/low closed forest and closed scrub/weed areas. The moss Racopilum cuspidigerum is known to occur here.
Condition
As at 12 January 1999, the park was intact in its 1983 conserved form. The park is substantially intact as an area of remnant bushland.
Modifications and dates
The site has seen the following modifications:
1892: established Smelting Company on two acres, with adjoining seventeen acres of bush to the north designed as buffer to the residential areas and zoned "open space". The Company allowed public access to the foreshore for recreation, through all areas except the actual works area. The condition of the bush fluctuated, depending on the amount of timber being used to fire the smelters.
1956: Almost 7 acres of "open space" became known as Weil Park when purchased by Hunter's Hill Council and Cumberland County Council. Bush cleared and a grassed oval created for sporting activities.
1967: the Smelting Company works moved to Alexandria and sold to A.V.Jennings - series of DAs - didn't progress.
SPA then arranged to buy from Jennings 5.6 acres of sloping waterfront bush and abandoned industrial reserve for a "foreshore reserve".
1971: Minister for Local Government rezoned the land from Reserved Open Space to Residential.
1977: Premier banned development on the site. The discovery of radioactive waste on the site raised serious doubts as to its suitability for residential development.
1983: Premier Wran announced that site to be set aside for full public access on a permanent basis.
1983–1999: Some improvements have been made, including a carpark, paths, foreshore park, and a viewing platform.
Heritage listing
As at 26 March 1999, Kelly's Bush Park has high local significance as a remnant of natural bushland located on the foreshores of the Parramatta River in Hunters Hill. The site has State significance as the site of the first "green bans" of the 1970s when a group of local residents enlisted the assistance of unions to oppose development of the site.
Kellys Bush Park was listed on the New South Wales State Heritage Register on 2 April 1999.

The Kenya Ceramic Jiko is a portable, charcoal-burning stove used for cooking, found primarily in urban homes in Kenya. It was developed through the collaboration of both local and international groups, to reduce fuel consumption.
Description
The Kenya Ceramic Jiko, known as KCJ, is a stove which uses charcoal as fuel. It has as an hourglass shape, and it is made from a metal exterior, with a ceramic internal liner. The ceramic liner has holes in its base, which allows ash to fall through and be collected in the box located at the bottom of the stove. The depth of the most universally used types of the KCJ range from 70 to 100 mm.
History
The idea for the Kenya Ceramic Jiko came from the Thai Bucket Stove and was modeled after the Kenyan Traditional Metal Stove known as TMS. It was from the re-designing of these two stoves that the Kenya Ceramic Jiko was created. Through the collaboration of both local and international organizations, the Kenya Ceramic Jiko evolved and took shape. Organizations such as CARE, UNICEF, The Bellerive Foundation, as well as the United States and German aid agencies all played a role in the development and promotion of the KCJ. The Kenya Energy and Environment Organization (KENGO) has played an active role in increasing awareness, and promoting the use of the Kenya Ceramic Jiko since 1982.
Engineering
To produce the Kenya Ceramic Jiko, two main materials are needed: clay to make the ceramic, and metal. The moulding of the stove is made from mild sheet metal, which can be attained from scrap metal such as that found in bitumen drums. For the sheet metal, the minimum required thickness is 0.5 mm, and the maximum is 0.8 mm. All joints in the metal frame are held together using either riveting or folding. For the pot-rest, a steel round bar between 7–8 mm in thickness should be used, while an 0.8 mm thick sheet metal should be used to create the pot-feet. The metal used to create the base of the stove can be even thinner, about 0.25 mm thick, as the ceramic inner lining protects it from direct contact with heat.
The ceramic part of the stove is made with clay, which is shaped and then fired. The qualities for the ideal type of clay for use are: ability to maintain good strength when fired at 900 °C; ability to remain slightly porous when temperatures reach 1150 °C; the clay should not warp or change shape when fired at 1250 °C. When the clay is fired up, it should turn to a light pink to white colour, and, to reduce the likelihood of cracking, it should shrink less than 8% after being fired. Clay which meets all the above standards is generally referred to as a "fireclay".
To produce the Kenya Ceramic Jiko, two types of skilled labour are needed, a metalworker, and a clay worker. Other than a hammer, all other tools needed to manufacture the Kenya Ceramic Jiko can be found from scraps or hand made.
Health
Open indoor combustion of wood, coal, charcoal, peat (virtually any plant matter) can lead to health problems. At the temperature of a normal fire, these materials "burn dirty," wasting much of their potential fuel in the form of smoke. This incomplete combustion means that toxic gases (i.e., smoke, containing chemicals such as carbon monoxide, nitrous oxide, sulfur oxides) and particulate matter are blown up into the room's atmosphere. These gases and particles are clearly linked to increased risk of cancer and serious acute or chronic respiratory problems. The simplest way for people relying on open fires to reduce this risk may be to thoroughly dry (or dehydrate) fuel before burning it. The less water in the fuel, the hotter the fire, the cleaner the combustion, the cleaner the indoor air quality. Drying tinder is especially helpful, since wet tinder – with no help from the heat of an established fire – produces particularly harmful smoke.
Environment
In Kenya about 70% of energy consumed is from wood fuel, with 80% of the population dependent upon it. Rural stove users typically burn wood directly, while the urban population tends to burn charcoal as fuel. The Kenyan Ministry of Energy and Regional Development estimated that, in 1986, the annual demand for wood as a fuel was 18.7 million tonnes, and growing at a rate of 3.6% per year. Cutting down trees for fuel has led to environmental degradation, including loss of forests, loss of biodiversity, destruction of habitats, and an increase in soil erosion. Reserves of wood were being exhausted by 40% more than the rate of replacement.
Benefits
When used properly, the Kenya Ceramic Jiko has the ability to reduce fuel consumption by 20–50%, therefore reducing the demand for wood as a fuel resource. The stove may reduce 20% of emissions produced from incomplete combustion; however studies are still being conducted to confirm this. In addition, the Ceramic Jiko increases child safety as the ceramic liner prevents the stove from becoming extremely hot.

Khormusan industry was a Paleolithic archeological industry in Nubia dated at 42,000 to 18,000 BP.
The Khormusan industry in Nubia began between 42,000 and 32,000 BP. Khormusans developed tools not only from stone but also from animal bones and hematite. They also developed small arrow heads resembling those of Native Americans, but no bows have been found. The end of the Khormusan industry came around 18,000 BP, with the appearance of other cultures in the region, including the Gemaian.
It was succeeded by the Halfan culture.

A kiln is a thermally insulated chamber, a type of oven, that produces temperatures sufficient to complete some process, such as hardening, drying, or chemical changes. Kilns have been used for millennia to turn objects made from clay into pottery, tiles and bricks. Various industries use rotary kilns for pyroprocessing (to calcinate ores, such as limestone to lime for cement) and to transform many other materials.
Etymology
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, kiln was derived from the words cyline, cylene, cyln(e) in Old English, in turn derived from Latin culina ('kitchen'). In Middle English, the word is attested as kulne, kyllne, kilne, kiln, kylle, kyll, kil, kill, keele, kiele. In Greek the word καίειν, kaiein, means 'to burn'.
Pronunciation
The word 'kiln' was originally pronounced 'kil' with the 'n' silent, as is referenced in Webster's Dictionary of 1828 and in English Words as Spoken and Written for Upper Grades by James A. Bowen 1900: "The digraph ln, n silent, occurs in kiln. A fall down the kiln can kill you." Bowen was noting that "kill" and "kiln" are homophones.
Uses of kilns
Pit fired pottery was produced for thousands of years before the earliest known kiln, which dates to around 6000 BCE, and was found at the Yarim Tepe site in modern Iraq. Neolithic kilns were able to produce temperatures greater than 900 °C (1652 °F).
Uses include:
Annealing, fusing and deforming glass, or fusing metallic oxide paints to the surface of glass
Heat treatment for metallic workpieces
Ceramics
Brickworks
Melting metal for casting
Calcination of ore in a rotary kiln prior to smelting
Pyrolysis of chemical materials
Heating limestone with clay in the manufacture of Portland cement, the cement kiln
Heating limestone to make quicklime or calcium oxide, the lime kiln
Heating gypsum to make plaster of Paris
For cremation (at high temperature)
Drying of tobacco leaves
Drying malted barley for brewing and other fermentations
Drying hops for brewing (known as a hop kiln or oast house)
Drying corn (grain) before grinding or storage, sometimes called a corn kiln, corn drying kiln
Drying green lumber so it can be used immediately
Drying wood for use as firewood
Heating wood to the point of pyrolysis to produce charcoal
Extracting pine tar from pine tree logs or roots
Ceramic kilns
Kilns are an essential part of the manufacture of almost all types of ceramics. Ceramics require high temperatures for chemical and physical reactions to occur that will permanently alter the unfired body. In the case of pottery, clay materials are shaped, dried and then fired in a kiln. The final characteristics are determined by the composition and preparation of the clay body and the temperature at which it is fired. After a first firing, glazes may be used and the ware is fired a second time to fuse the glaze into the body. A third firing at a lower temperature may be required to fix overglaze decoration. Modern kilns often have sophisticated electronic control systems, although pyrometric devices are often also used.
Clay consists of fine-grained particles that are relatively weak and porous. Clay is combined with other minerals to create a workable clay body. The firing process includes sintering. This heats the clay until the particles partially melt and flow together, creating a strong, single mass, composed of a glassy phase interspersed with pores and crystalline material. Through firing, the pores are reduced in size, causing the material to shrink slightly.
In the broadest terms, there are two types of kilns: intermittent and continuous, both being an insulate box with a controlled inner temperature and atmosphere.
A continuous kiln, sometimes called a tunnel kiln, is long with only the central portion directly heated. From the cool entrance, ware is slowly moved through the kiln, and its temperature is increased steadily as it approaches the central, hottest part of the kiln. As it continues through the kiln, the temperature is reduced until the ware exits the kiln nearly at room temperature. A continuous kiln is energy-efficient, because heat given off during cooling is recycled to pre-heat the incoming ware. In some designs, the ware is left in one place, while the heating zone moves across it. Kilns in this type include:
Hoffmann kiln
Bull's Trench kiln
Habla (Zig-Zag) kiln
Roller kiln: A special type of kiln, common in tableware and tile manufacture, is the roller-hearth kiln, in which wares placed on bats are carried through the kiln on rollers.
In the intermittent kiln, the ware is placed inside the kiln, the kiln is closed, and the internal temperature is increased according to a schedule. After the firing is completed, both the kiln and the ware are cooled. The ware is removed, the kiln is cleaned and the next cycle begins. Kilns in this type include:
Clamp kiln
Skove kiln
Scotch kiln
Down-draft kiln
Shuttle kilns: this is a car-bottom kiln with a door on one or both ends. Burners are positioned top and bottom on each side, creating a turbulent circular air flow. This type of kiln is generally a multi-car design and is used for processing whitewares, technical ceramics and refractories in batches. Depending upon the size of ware, shuttle kilns may be equipped with car-moving devices to transfer fired and unfired ware in and out of the kiln. Shuttle kilns can be either updraft or downdraft. A shuttle kiln derives its name from the fact that kiln cars can enter a shuttle kiln from either end of the kiln, whereas a tunnel kiln has flow in only one direction.
Kiln technology is very old. Kilns developed from a simple earthen trench filled with pots and fuel pit firing, to modern methods. One improvement was to build a firing chamber around pots with baffles and a stoking hole. This conserved heat. A chimney stack improved the air flow or draw of the kiln, thus burning the fuel more completely.
Chinese kiln technology has always been a key factor in the development of Chinese pottery, and until recent centuries was the most advanced in the world. The Chinese developed kilns capable of firing at around 1,000 °C before 2000 BCE. These were updraft kilns, often built below ground. Two main types of kiln were developed by about 200 AD and remained in use until modern times. These are the dragon kiln of hilly southern China, usually fuelled by wood, long and thin and running up a slope, and the horseshoe-shaped mantou kiln of the north Chinese plains, smaller and more compact. Both could reliably produce the temperatures of up to 1300 °C or more needed for porcelain. In the late Ming, the egg-shaped kiln or zhenyao was developed at Jingdezhen and mainly used there. This was something of a compromise between the other types, and offered locations in the firing chamber with a range of firing conditions.
Both Ancient Roman pottery and medieval Chinese pottery could be fired in industrial quantities, with tens of thousands of pieces in a single firing. Early examples of simpler kilns found in Britain include those that made roof-tiles during the Roman occupation. These kilns were built up the side of a slope, such that a fire could be lit at the bottom and the heat would rise up into the kiln.
Traditional kilns include:
Dragon kiln of south China: thin and long, climbing up a hillside. This type spread to the rest of East Asia giving the Japanese anagama kiln, arriving via Korea in the 5th century. This kiln usually consists of one long firing chamber, pierced with smaller ware stacking ports on one side, with a firebox at one end and a flue at the other. Firing time can vary from one day to several weeks. Traditional anagama kilns are also built on a slope to allow for a better draft. The Japanese noborigama kiln is an evolution from anagama design as a multi-chamber kiln where wood is stacked from the front firebox at first, then only through the side-stoking holes with the benefit of having air heated up to 600 °C (1,100 °F) from the front firebox, enabling more efficient firings.
Khmer Kiln: quite similar to the anagama kiln; however, traditional Khmer Kilns had a flat roof. Chinese, Korean or Japanese kilns have an arch roof. These types of kiln vary in size and can measure in the tens of meters. The firing time also varies and can last several days.
Bottle kiln: a type of intermittent kiln, usually coal-fired, formerly used in the firing of pottery; such a kiln was surrounded by a tall brick hovel or cone, of typical bottle shape. The tableware was enclosed in sealed fireclay saggars; as the heat and smoke from the fires passed through the oven it would be fired at temperatures up to 1,400 °C (2,600 °F).
Biscuit kiln: The first firing would take place in the biscuit kiln.
Glost kiln: The biscuit-ware was glazed and given a second glost firing in glost kilns.
Mantou kiln of north China, smaller and more compact than the dragon kiln
Muffle kiln: This was used to fire over-glaze decoration, at a temperature under 800 °C (1,500 °F). In these cool kilns the smoke from the fires passed through flues outside the oven.
Catenary arch kiln: Typically used for the firing of pottery using salt, these by their form (a catenary arch) tend to retain their shape over repeated heating and cooling cycles, whereas other types require extensive metalwork supports.
Sèvres kiln: invented in Sèvres, France, it efficiently generated high-temperatures 1,240 °C (2,260 °F) to produce waterproof ceramic bodies and easy-to-obtain glazes. It features a down-draft design that produces high temperature in shorter time, even with wood-firing.
Bourry box kiln, similar to previous one
Modern kilns
With the industrial age, kilns were designed to use electricity and more refined fuels, including natural gas and propane. Many large industrial pottery kilns use natural gas, as it is generally clean, efficient and easy to control. Modern kilns can be fitted with computerized controls allowing for fine adjustments during the firing. A user may choose to control the rate of temperature climb or ramp, hold or soak the temperature at any given point, or control the rate of cooling. Both electric and gas kilns are common for smaller scale production in industry and craft, handmade and sculptural work.
Modern kilns include:
Retort kiln: a type of kiln which can reach temperatures around 1,500 °C (2,700 °F) for extended periods of time. Typically, these kilns are used in industrial purposes, and feature movable charging cars which make up the bottom and door of the kiln.
Electric kilns: kilns operated by electricity were developed in the 20th century, primarily for smaller scale use such as in schools, universities, and hobby centers. The atmosphere in most designs of electric kiln is rich in oxygen, as there is no open flame to consume oxygen molecules. However, reducing conditions can be created with appropriate gas input, or by using saggars in a particular way.
Microwave assisted firing: this technique combines microwave energy with more conventional energy sources, such as radiant gas or electric heating, to process ceramic materials to the required high temperatures. Microwave-assisted firing offers significant economic benefits.
Microwave kiln: These small kilns are designed to be placed inside a standard microwave oven. The kiln body is made from a porous ceramic material lined with a coating that absorbs microwave energy. The microwave kiln is placed inside a microwave oven and heated to the desired temperature. The heating process is much less controlled than most modern electric kilns, as there is no built-in temperature monitoring. The user must monitor the process closely to achieve the desired results, adjusting time and power levels programmed on the microwave oven. A small hole in the lid of the kiln can be used to estimate the interior temperature visually, as hot materials will glow. Microwave kilns are designed to reach internal temperatures of over 1,400 °C (2,600 °F), hot enough to work some types of glass, metals, and ceramics, while the outside of the kiln remains cool enough to handle with hot pads or tongs. After firing, the kiln should be removed from the microwave oven and placed on heat-proof surface while it is allowed to cool. Microwave kilns are limited in size, usually no more than 20 centimetres (8 in) in diameter.
Top-hat kiln: an intermittent kiln of a type sometimes used to fire pottery. The ware is set on a refractory hearth, or plinth, over which a box-shaped cover is lowered.
Wood-drying kiln
Green wood from newly felled trees has far too high a moisture content to be commercially useful and will rot, warp and split. Both hardwoods and softwood must be left to dry out until the moisture content is between 18% and 8%. This can be a long process unless accelerated by use of a kiln. A variety of kiln technologies exist today: conventional, dehumidification, solar, vacuum and radio frequency.
Conventional wood dry kilns are either package-type (side-loader) or track-type (tram) construction. Most hardwood lumber kilns are side-loader kilns in which fork trucks are used to load lumber packages into the kiln. Most softwood kilns are track types in which the timber is loaded on kiln/track cars for loading the kiln. Modern high-temperature, high-air-velocity conventional kilns can typically dry 25-millimetre-thick (1 in) green wood in 10 hours down to a moisture content of 18%. However, 25-mm-thick green red oak requires about 28 days to dry down to a moisture content of 8%.
Heat is typically introduced via steam running through fin/tube heat exchangers controlled by on/off pneumatic valves. Humidity is removed by a system of vents, the specific layout of which are usually particular to a given manufacturer. In general, cool dry air is introduced at one end of the kiln while warm moist air is expelled at the other. Hardwood conventional kilns also require the introduction of humidity via either steam spray or cold water misting systems to keep the relative humidity inside the kiln from dropping too low during the drying cycle. Fan directions are typically reversed periodically to ensure even drying of larger kiln charges.
Most softwood kilns operate below 115 °C (240 °F) temperature. Hardwood kiln drying schedules typically keep the dry bulb temperature below 80 °C (180 °F). Difficult-to-dry species might not exceed 60 °C (140 °F).
Dehumidification kilns are similar to other kilns in basic construction and drying times are usually comparable. Heat comes primarily from an integral dehumidification unit that also removes humidity. Auxiliary heat is often provided early in the schedule to supplement the dehumidifier.
Solar kilns are conventional kilns, typically built by hobbyists to keep initial investment costs low. Heat is provided via solar radiation, while internal air circulation is typically passive.
Vacuum and radio frequency kilns reduce the air pressure to attempt to speed up the drying process. A variety of these vacuum technologies exist, varying primarily in the method heat is introduced into the wood charge. Hot water platten vacuum kilns use aluminum heating plates with the water circulating within as the heat source, and typically operate at significantly reduced absolute pressure. Discontinuous and SSV (super-heated steam) use atmosphere pressure to introduce heat into the kiln charge. The entire kiln charge comes up to full atmospheric pressure, the air in the chamber is then heated and finally a vacuum is pulled as the charge cools. SSV run at partial-atmospheres, typically around 1/3 of full atmospheric pressure, in a hybrid of vacuum and conventional kiln technology (SSV kilns are significantly more popular in Europe where the locally harvested wood is easier to dry than the North American woods.) RF/V (radio frequency + vacuum) kilns use microwave radiation to heat the kiln charge, and typically have the highest operating cost due to the heat of vaporization being provided by electricity rather than local fossil fuel or waste wood sources.
The economics of different wood drying technologies are based on the total energy, capital, insurance/risk, environmental impacts, labor, maintenance, and product degradation costs. These costs, which can be a significant part of plant costs, involve the differential impact of the presence of drying equipment in a specific plant. Every piece of equipment from the green trimmer to the infeed system at the planer mill is part of the "drying system". The true costs of the drying system can only be determined when comparing the total plant costs and risks with and without drying.
Kiln dried firewood was pioneered during the 1980s, and was later adopted extensively in Europe due to the economic and practical benefits of selling wood with a lower moisture content (with optimal moisture levels of under 20% being much easier to achieve).
The total (harmful) air emissions produced by wood kilns, including their heat source, can be significant. Typically, the higher the temperature at which the kiln operates, the larger the quantity of emissions that are produced (per mass unit of water removed). This is especially true in the drying of thin veneers and high-temperature drying of softwoods.
Gallery

Kimberley points are a type of Aboriginal stone tool made by pressure flaking both discarded glass and stone. Best known for the points made of glass, these artifacts are an example of adaptive reuse of Western technology by a non-western culture.
They are often used as an indicator that an archaeological site is a post-contact Aboriginal site. There is debate in archaeological literature about the use and significance of these points, with some claims that they were made for sale to tourists and as status items, and not as hunting tools.

Kingsford is a brand that makes charcoal briquettes, along with related products, used for grilling. Established in 1920 by Henry Ford, the brand is now owned by the Clorox Company. Currently, the Kingsford Products Company remains the leading manufacturer of charcoal in the United States, with 80% market share. More than 1 million tons of wood scraps are converted into charcoal briquettes annually.
History
The Ford Motor Company sold more than one million Ford Model Ts in 1919. Each one used 100 board feet of wood for parts such as the frame, dashboard, steering wheel, and wheels. Because of the amount of wood needed, Henry Ford decided to produce his own supply. He enlisted the help of Edward G. Kingsford, a real estate agent and timber cruiser from Michigan, to locate a supply of wood. Kingsford's wife was a cousin of Ford. In the early 1920s, Ford acquired large timberland in Iron Mountain, Michigan, and built a sawmill and parts plant in a neighboring area which subsequently became Kingsford, Michigan. The mill and plants produced sufficient parts for the cars, but generated waste such as stumps, branches and sawdust. Ford suggested that all wood scraps be processed into charcoal.
A University of Oregon chemist, Orin Stafford, invented a method for making pillow-shaped lumps of fuel from sawdust and mill waste combined with tar and bound together with cornstarch. He called the lumps "charcoal briquettes." Thomas Edison designed the briquette factory adjacent to the sawmill and Kingsford ran it. Ford named the new business Ford Charcoal. It was a model of efficiency, producing 610 lb (280 kg) of briquettes for every ton of scrap wood. In the beginning, Ford's "briquettes" were sold only through Ford dealerships. The charcoal was marketed to meat and fish smokehouses, but demand soon exceeded supply.
By the mid-1930s, Ford was marketing "Picnic Kits" containing charcoal and portable grills, capitalizing on the link between motoring and outdoor adventure that his vagabond travels popularized. "Enjoy a modern picnic," the packages read, "Sizzling broiled meats, steaming coffee, toasted sandwiches." But it wasn't until after World War II that backyard barbecuing took off, thanks to suburban migration, the invention of the Weber grill, and increased marketing efforts. In 1951 an investment group led by Arthur and William Grede of Milwaukee bought Ford Charcoal and took over operations, renaming it Kingsford Chemical Company reflecting its association with Kingsford, Michigan. It was renamed to Kingsford Company in 1957. Kingsford Company was later acquired by Clorox in 1973.
Manufacturing
Kingsford charcoal is made by charring hardwoods such as oak, maple, hickory, walnut, etc., depending on the regional manufacturing plant. That char is then mixed with other ingredients to make a charcoal briquette. As of January 2016, Kingsford Charcoal contains the following ingredients:
Wood char - Fuel for heating
Mineral char - Fuel for heating
Mineral carbon - Fuel for heating
Limestone - Uniform visual ashing
Starch - Binding agent
Borax - Release from press molds
Sawdust - Accelerate ignition
The raw materials, primarily wood scraps from regional sawmills, are delivered to Kingsford factories. The material undergoes magnetic filtration to remove any foreign metal objects. The wood scraps are milled into smaller wood chips. The material then moves into an industrial dryer filled with hot air to remove any moisture. The wood chips are later processed through a large furnace with multiple hearths (called a retort) in an oxygen controlled atmosphere that chars the wood without it burning. The wood gets progressively more charred as it drops from one hearth to the next. The charred wood chips are combined with the other dry ingredients and go through a hammermill which breaks everything down into small particles. This moves to a mixer where it is combined with the wet ingredients, starch and borax. This mixture is press formed into pillow-shaped briquettes, then moved on to be dried before being packaged for sale.
Kingsford also retails products that combine their charcoal with other flavors and spices to create flavored smoke.
Plant locations
Charcoal facilities
Belle, Missouri
Burnside, Kentucky
Parsons, West Virginia
Springfield, Oregon
Retort facilities
Beryl, West Virginia
Glen, Mississippi
Summer Shade, Kentucky

Knapping ( NAP-ing) is the shaping of flint, chert, obsidian, or other conchoidal fracturing stone through the process of lithic reduction to manufacture stone tools, strikers for flintlock firearms, or to produce flat-faced stones for building or facing walls, and flushwork decoration. The term “knap”(1500s) was originally onomatopoeic and meant “strike with a sharp sound” (with the k- pronounced) and later shifted to mean “to shape or work by sharp strikes”. Modern usage is more specific, referring almost exclusively to the free hand percussion process pictured. It is distinguished from the more general verb "chip" (to break up into small pieces, or unintentionally break off a piece of something) and is different from "carve" (removing only part of a face), and "cleave" (breaking along a natural plane).
Method
Flintknapping or knapping is done in a variety of ways depending on the purpose of the final product. For stone tools and flintlock strikers, chert is worked using a fabricator such as a hammerstone to remove lithic flakes from a nucleus or core of tool stone. Stone tools can then be further refined using wood, bone, and antler tools to perform pressure flaking.
For building work a hammer or pick is used to split chert nodules supported on the lap. Often the chert nodule will be split in half to create two cherts with a flat circular face for use in walls constructed of lime. More sophisticated knapping is employed to produce near-perfect cubes which are used as bricks.
Tools
There are many different methods of shaping stone into useful tools. One prominent knapping technique in early production is the Levallois technique, which utilizes a distinct striking platform and exploitation surface. Beyond the Levallois technique, there were also polyhedral strategies that differ from Levallois methods in that all faces were used as flaking surfaces and striking platforms. This method involves no division of function amongst parts of the core.
Early knappers could have used simple hammers made of wood or antler to shape stone tools. The factors that contribute to the knapping results are varied, but the EPA (exterior platform angle) indeed influences many attributes, such as length, thickness and termination of flakes.
Hard hammer techniques are used to remove large flakes of stone. Early knappers and hobbyists replicating their methods often use cobbles of very hard stone, such as quartzite. This technique can be used by flintknappers to remove broad flakes that can be made into smaller tools. This method of manufacture is believed to have been used to make some of the earliest stone tools ever found, some of which date from over 2 million years ago.
Soft hammer techniques are more precise than hard hammer methods of shaping stone. Soft hammer techniques allow a knapper to shape a stone into many different kinds of cutting, scraping, and projectile tools. These "soft hammer" techniques also produce longer, thinner flakes, potentially allowing for material conservation or a lighter lithic tool kit to be carried by mobile societies.
Pressure flaking involves removing narrow flakes along the edge of a stone tool. This technique is often used to do detailed thinning and shaping of a stone tool. Pressure flaking involves putting a large amount of force across a region on the edge of the tool and (when successful) causing a narrow flake to come off of the stone. Modern hobbyists often use pressure flaking tools with a copper or brass tip, but early knappers could have used antler tines or a pointed wooden punch; traditionalist knappers still use antler tines and copper-tipped tools. The major advantage of using soft metals rather than wood or bone is that the metal punches wear down less and are less likely to break under pressure.
Uses
In cultures that have not adopted metalworking technologies, the production of stone tools by knappers is common, but in modern cultures the making of such tools is the domain of experimental archaeologists and hobbyists. Archaeologists usually undertake the task so that they can better understand how prehistoric stone tools were made.
Knapping was developed in Africa to aid hunter-gatherers in collecting food. Hunter-gatherers would take prepared tools like Levallois points and triangular flakes with them away from their site to hunt.
In Ancient Africa, specifically Ancient Egypt, knapping methods were large-scale productions of flint and chert tools made for both soft and hard stone working. Flint knappers made sharp, disposable tools used to shape limestone, granite, and other materials. These flint tools evolved in design depending on the material they worked with, serving multiple purposes like carving hieroglyphs, shaping sculptures, and smoothing surfaces.
During the time when knapping was used to make tools, flaked tools were no less effective compared to other tool making methods. With modern technology, it shows that flake tools stood against environmental shifts and were fit for a purpose.
Knapping gun flints, used by flintlock firearms was formerly a major industry in flint-bearing locations, such as Brandon in Suffolk, England, and the small towns of Meusnes and Couffy in France. Meusnes has a small museum dedicated to the industry.
In 1804, during the Napoleonic Wars, Brandon was supplying over 400,000 flints a month for use by the British Army and Navy. Brandon knappers made gun flints for export to Africa as late as the 1960s.
Knapping for building purposes is still a skill that is practiced in the flint-bearing regions of southern England, such as Sussex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, and in northern France, especially Brittany and Normandy, where there is a resurgence of the craft due to government funding.
Health hazards
The sustained inhalation of flint dust produced by knapping can cause silicosis. This has been called "the world's first industrial disease". However, it is unclear how severe the issue may actually have been in prehistoric working conditions, as silicosis is aggravated by a lack of ventilation and the use of metal tools which produce more dust. Ancient knappers, working in the open air and with stone and bone tools, would have had less prolonged exposure to dust than in more modern workshops.
When gun flint knapping was a large-scale industry in Brandon, Suffolk, silicosis was widely known as knappers' rot. It has been claimed silicosis was responsible for the early death of three-quarters of Brandon gun flint makers. In one workshop, seven of the eight workers died of the condition before the age of fifty. The average age of death for knappers was 44 years, compared to 66 for other employed men in the same area.
Modern knappers are advised to work in the open air to reduce the dust hazard, and to wear eye and hand protection. Some modern knappers wear a respirator to guard against dust. A 2020 survey of 173 knappers found that 86% used eye protection, 57% wore gloves, and only 5% used a respirator, mask, or fan to control dust (although 68% preferred to knap outdoors). About half of respondents reported being injured at least "often" when knapping, and 23% admitted having to seek professional medical attention at least once. The most common injuries were cuts and bruises, typically on the fingers and hands, while flakes in the eye were also frequent.
Contemporary study
Modern American interest in knapping can be traced back to the study of a California Native American called Ishi who lived in the early twentieth century. Ishi taught scholars and academics traditional methods of making stone tools and how to use them for survival in the wild. Early European explorers to the New world were also exposed to flint knapping techniques. Additionally, several pioneering nineteenth-century European experimental knappers are also known and in the late 1960s and early 1970s experimental archaeologist Don Crabtree published texts such as Experiments in Flintworking. François Bordes was an early writer on Old World knapping; he experimented with ways to replicate stone tools found across Western Europe. These authors helped to ignite a small craze in knapping among archaeologists and prehistorians.
English archaeologist Phil Harding is another contemporary expert, whose exposure on the television series Time Team has led to him being a familiar figure in the UK and beyond. Many groups, with members from all walks of life, can now be found across the United States and Europe. These organizations continue to demonstrate and teach various ways of shaping stone tools.

A knife (pl.: knives; from Old Norse knifr 'knife, dirk') is a tool or weapon with a cutting edge or blade, usually attached to a handle or hilt. One of the earliest tools used by humanity, knives appeared at least 2.5 million years ago, as evidenced by the Oldowan tools. Originally made of wood, bone, and stone (such as flint and obsidian), over the centuries, in step with improvements in both metallurgy and manufacturing, knife blades have been made from copper, bronze, iron, steel, ceramic, and titanium. Most modern knives have fixed or folding blades, with styles varying by maker and country.
Knives can serve various purposes. Hunters use the hunting knife, soldiers use the combat knife, scouts, campers, and hikers carry the pocketknife; there are kitchen knives for preparing foods (the chef's knife, the paring knife, bread knife, cleaver), table knife (butter knives and steak knives), weapons (daggers or switchblades), knives for throwing or juggling, and knives for religious ceremony or display (the kirpan).
Parts
A modern knife consists of:
the blade
the handle
the point – the end of the knife used for piercing
the edge – the cutting surface of the knife extending from the point to the heel
the grind – the cross section shape of the blade
the spine – the thickest section of the blade; on a single-edged knife, the side opposite the edge; on a two-edged knife, more toward the middle
the fuller – a groove added to make the blade lighter (optional)
the ricasso – the flat section of the blade located at the junction of the blade and the knife's bolster or guard (optional)
the guard – the barrier between the blade and the handle which prevents the hand from slipping forward onto the blade and protects the hand from the external forces that are usually applied to the blade during use (optional)
the hilt or butt – the end of the handle used for blunt force
the lanyard – a strap used to secure the knife to the wrist (optional)
The blade edge can be plain or serrated, or a combination of both. Single-edged knives may have a reverse edge or false edge occupying a section of the spine. These edges are usually serrated and are used to further enhance function.
The handle, used to grip and manipulate the blade safely, may include a tang, a portion of the blade that extends into the handle. Knives are made with partial tangs (extending part way into the handle, known as "stick tangs") or full tangs (extending the full length of the handle, often visible on top and bottom). There is also the enterçado construction method present in antique knives from Brazil, such as the Sorocaban Knife, which consists in riveting a repurposed blade to the ricasso of a bladeless handle. The handle may include a bolster, a piece of heavy material (usually metal) situated at the front or rear of the handle. The bolster, as its name suggests, is used to mechanically strengthen the knife.
Blade
Knife blades can be manufactured from a variety of materials, each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Carbon steel, an alloy of iron and carbon, can be very sharp. It holds its edge well, and remains easy to sharpen, but is vulnerable to rust and stains. Stainless steel is an alloy of iron, chromium, possibly nickel, and molybdenum, with only a small amount of carbon. It is not able to take quite as sharp an edge as carbon steel, but is highly resistant to corrosion. High carbon stainless steel is stainless steel with a higher amount of carbon, intended to incorporate the better attributes of carbon steel and stainless steel. High carbon stainless steel blades do not discolor or stain, and maintain a sharp edge. Laminated blades use multiple metals to create a layered structure, combining the attributes of both. For example, a harder, more brittle steel may be pressed between an outer layer of softer, tougher stainless steel to reduce vulnerability to corrosion. In this case, however, the part most affected by corrosion, the edge, is still vulnerable. Damascus steel is a form of pattern welding with similarities to laminate construction. Layers of different steel types are welded together, but then the stock is manipulated to create patterns in the steel.
Titanium is a metal that has a higher strength-to-weight ratio and more flexible than steel. Although less hard and unable to take as sharp an edge, carbides in the titanium alloy allow them to be heat-treated to a sufficient hardness. Ceramic blades are hard, brittle, lightweight, and do not corrode: they may maintain a sharp edge for years with no maintenance at all, but are fragile and will break if dropped on a hard surface or twisted in use. They can only be sharpened on silicon carbide sandpaper and appropriate grinding wheels. Plastic blades are not sharp and are usually serrated to enable them to cut. They are often disposable.
Steel blades are commonly shaped by forging or stock removal. Forged blades are made by heating a single piece of steel, then shaping the metal while hot using a hammer or press. Stock removal blades are shaped by grinding and removing metal. With both methods, after shaping, the steel must be heat treated. This involves heating the steel above its critical point, then quenching the blade to harden it. After hardening, the blade is tempered to remove stresses and make the blade tougher. Mass manufactured kitchen cutlery uses both the forging and stock removal processes. Forging tends to be reserved for manufacturers' more expensive product lines, and can often be distinguished from stock removal product lines by the presence of an integral bolster, though integral bolsters can be crafted through either shaping method.
Knives are sharpened in various ways. Flat ground blades have a profile that tapers from the thick spine to the sharp edge in a straight or convex line. Seen in cross section, the blade would form a long, thin triangle, or where the taper does not extend to the back of the blade, a long thin rectangle with one peaked side. Hollow ground blades have concave, beveled edges. The resulting blade has a thinner edge, so it may have better cutting ability for shallow cuts, but it is lighter and less durable than flat ground blades and will tend to bind in deep cuts. Serrated blade knives have a wavy, scalloped or saw-like blade. Serrated blades are more well suited for tasks that require aggressive 'sawing' motions, whereas plain edge blades are better suited for tasks that require push-through cuts (e.g., shaving, chopping, slicing).
Many knives have holes in the blade for various uses. Holes are commonly drilled in blades to reduce friction while cutting, increase single-handed usability of pocket knives, and, for butchers' knives, allow hanging out of the way when not in use.
Fixed-blade features
A fixed blade knife, sometimes called a sheath knife, does not fold or slide, and is typically stronger due to the tang, the extension of the blade into the handle, and lack of moving parts.
Folding blade features
A folding knife connects the blade to the handle through a pivot, allowing the blade to fold into the handle. To prevent injury to the knife user through the blade accidentally closing on the user's hand, folding knives typically have a locking mechanism. Different locking mechanisms are favored by various individuals for reasons such as perceived strength (lock safety), legality, and ease of use.
Popular locking mechanisms include:
Slip joint – Found most commonly on traditional pocket knives, the opened blade does not lock, but is held in place by a spring device that allows the blade to fold if a certain amount of pressure is applied.
Lockback – Also known as the spine lock, the lockback includes a pivoted latch affixed to a spring, and can be disengaged only by pressing the latch down to release the blade.
Linerlock – Invented by Michael Walker, a Linerlock is a folding knife with a side-spring lock that can be opened and closed with one hand without repositioning the knife in the hand. The lock is self-adjusting for wear.
Compression Lock – A variant of the Liner Lock, it uses a small piece of metal at the tip of the lock to lock into a small corresponding impression in the blade. This creates a lock that does not disengage when the blade is torqued, instead of becoming more tightly locked. It is released by pressing the tab of metal to the side, to allow the blade to be placed into its groove set into the handle.
Frame Lock – Also known as the integral lock or monolock, this locking mechanism was invented by a custom knifemaker Chris Reeve for the Sebenza as an update to the liner lock. The frame lock works in a manner similar to the liner lock but uses a partial cutout of the actual knife handle, rather than a separate liner inside the handle to hold the blade in place.
Collar lock – found on Opinel knives.
Button Lock – Found mainly on automatic knives, this type of lock uses a small push-button to open and release the knife.
Axis Lock – A locking mechanism patented by Benchmade Knife Company until 2020. A cylindrical bearing is tensioned such that it will jump between the knife blade and some feature of the handle to lock the blade open.
Arc Lock – A locking mechanism exclusively licensed to SOG Specialty Knives. It differs from an axis lock in that the cylindrical bearing is tensioned by a rotary spring rather than an axial spring.
Ball Bearing Lock – A locking mechanism exclusively licensed to Spyderco. This lock is conceptually similar to the axis and arc locks but the bearing is instead a ball bearing.
Tri-Ad Lock – A locking mechanism exclusively licensed to Cold Steel. It is a form of lockback which incorporates a thick steel stop pin between the front of the latch and the back of the tang to transfer force from the blade into the handle.
PickLock – A round post on the back base of the blade locks into a hole in a spring tab in the handle. To close, manually lift (pick) the spring tab (lock) off the blade post with your fingers, or in "Italian Style Stilettos" swivel the bolster (hand guard) clockwise to lift the spring tab off the blade post.
Another prominent feature of many folding knives is the opening mechanism. Traditional pocket knives and Swiss Army knives commonly employ the nail nick, while modern folding knives more often use a stud, hole, disk, or flipper located on the blade, all of which have the benefit of allowing the user to open the knife with one hand.
The "wave" feature is another prominent design, which uses a part of the blade that protrudes outward to catch on one's pocket as it is drawn, thus opening the blade; this was patented by Ernest Emerson and is not only used on many of the Emerson knives, but also on knives produced by several other manufacturers, notably Spyderco and Cold Steel.
Automatic or switchblade knives open using the stored energy from a spring that is released when the user presses a button or lever or other actuator built into the handle of the knife. Automatic knives are severely restricted by law in the UK and most American states.
Increasingly common are assisted opening knives which use springs to propel the blade once the user has moved it past a certain angle. These differ from automatic or switchblade knives in that the blade is not released by means of a button or catch on the handle; rather, the blade itself is the actuator. Most assisted openers use flippers as their opening mechanism. Assisted opening knives can be as fast or faster than automatic knives to deploy.
Common locking mechanisms
In the lock back, as in many folding knives, a stop pin acting on the top (or behind) the blade prevents it from rotating clockwise. A hook on the tang of the blade engages with a hook on the rocker bar which prevents the blade from rotating counter-clockwise. The rocker bar is held in position by a torsion bar. To release the knife the rocker bar is pushed downwards as indicated and pivots around the rocker pin, lifting the hook and freeing the blade.
When negative pressure (pushing down on the spine) is applied to the blade all the stress is transferred from the hook on the blade's tang to the hook on the rocker bar and thence to the small rocker pin. Excessive stress can shear one or both of these hooks rendering the knife effectively useless. Knife company Cold Steel uses a variant of the lock back called the Tri-Ad Lock which introduces a pin in front of the rocker bar to relieve stress on the rocker pin, has an elongated hole around the rocker pin to allow the mechanism to wear over time without losing strength and angles the hooks so that the faces no longer meet vertically.
The bolt in the bolt lock is a rectangle of metal that is constrained to slide only back and forward. When the knife is open a spring biases the bolt to the forward position where it rests above the tang of the blade preventing the blade from closing. Small knobs extend through the handle of the knife on both sides allowing the user to slide the bolt backward freeing the knife to close. The Axis Lock used by knife maker Benchmade is functionally identical to the bolt lock except that it uses a cylinder rather than a rectangle to trap the blade. The Arc Lock by knife maker SOG is similar to the Axis Lock except the cylinder follows a curved path rather than a straight path.
In the liner lock, an L-shaped split in the liner allows part of the liner to move sideways from its resting position against the handle to the centre of the knife where it rests against the flat end of the tang. To disengage, this leaf spring is pushed so it again rests flush against the handle allowing the knife to rotate. A frame lock is functionally identical but instead of using a thin liner inside the handle material uses a thicker piece of metal as the handle and the same split in it allows a section of the frame to press against the tang.
Sliding blade features
A sliding knife is a knife that can be opened by sliding the knife blade out the front of the handle. One method of opening is where the blade exits out the front of the handle point-first and then is locked into place (an example of this is the gravity knife). Another form is an OTF (out-the-front) switchblade, which only requires the push of a button or spring to cause the blade to slide out of the handle and lock into place. To retract the blade back into the handle, a release lever or button, usually the same control as to open, is pressed. A very common form of sliding knife is the sliding utility knife (commonly known as a stanley knife or boxcutter).
Handle
The handles of knives can be made from a number of different materials, each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Handles are produced in a wide variety of shapes and styles. Handles are often textured to enhance grip.
Wood handles provide good grip and are warm in the hand, but are more difficult to care for. They do not resist water well, and will crack or warp with prolonged exposure to water. Modern stabilized and laminated woods have largely overcome these problems. Many beautiful and exotic hardwoods are employed in the manufacture of custom and some production knives. In some countries it is now forbidden for commercial butchers' knives to have wood handles, for sanitary reasons.
Plastic handles are more easily cared for than wooden handles, but can be slippery and become brittle over time.
Injection molded handles made from higher grade plastics are composed of polyphthalamide, and when marketed under trademarked names such as Zytel or Grivory, are reinforced with Kevlar or fiberglass. These are often used by major knife manufacturers.
Rubber handles such as Kraton or Resiprene-C are generally preferred over plastic due to their durable and cushioning nature.
Micarta is a popular handle material on user knives due to its toughness and stability. Micarta is nearly impervious to water, is grippy when wet, and is an excellent insulator. Micarta has come to refer to any fibrous material cast in resin. There are many varieties of micarta available. One very popular version is a fiberglass impregnated resin called G-10.
Leather handles are seen on some hunting and military knives, notably the KA-BAR. Leather handles are typically produced by stacking leather washers, or less commonly, as a sleeve surrounding another handle material. Russian manufacturers often use birchbark in the same manner.
Skeleton handles refers to the practice of using the tang itself as the handle, usually with sections of material removed to reduce weight. Skeleton handled knives are often wrapped with parachute cord or other wrapping materials to enhance grip.
Stainless steel and aluminum handles are durable and sanitary, but can be slippery. To counter this, premium knife makers make handles with ridges, bumps, or indentations to provide extra grip. Another problem with knives that have metal handles is that, since metal is an excellent heat-conductor, these knives can be very uncomfortable, and even painful or dangerous, when handled without gloves or other protective handwear in (very) cold climates.
More exotic materials usually only seen on art or ceremonial knives include: Stone, bone, mammoth tooth, mammoth ivory, oosik (walrus penis bone), walrus tusk, antler (often called stag in a knife context), sheep horn, buffalo horn, teeth, and mop (mother of pearl or "pearl"). Many materials have been employed in knife handles.
Handles may be adapted to accommodate the needs of people with disabilities. For example, knife handles may be made thicker or with more cushioning for people with arthritis in their hands. A non-slip handle accommodates people with palmar hyperhidrosis.
Types
Weapons
As a weapon, the knife is universally adopted as an essential tool. It is the essential element of a knife fight. For example:
Ballistic knife: A specialized combat knife with a detachable gas- or spring-propelled blade that can be fired to a distance of several feet or meters by pressing a trigger or switch on the handle.
Bayonet: A knife-shaped close-quarters combat weapon designed to attach to the muzzle of a rifle or similar weapon.
Butterfly knife: A folding pocket knife also known as a "balisong" or "batangas" with two counter-rotating handles where the blade is concealed within grooves in the handles.
Combat knife: Any knife intended to be used by soldiers in the field, as a general-use tool, but also for fighting.
Dagger: A single-edged or double-edged combat knife with a central spine and edge(s) sharpened their full length, used primarily for thrusting or stabbing. Variations include the Stiletto and Push dagger. See List of daggers for a more detailed list.
Fighting knife: A knife with a blade designed to inflict a lethal injury in a physical confrontation between two or more individuals at very short range (grappling distance). Well known examples include the Bowie knife, Ka-Bar combat knife, and the Fairbairn–Sykes fighting knife.
Machete: A knife with a broad blade designed for chopping, often curved either in a convex or concave fashion.
Shiv: A crudely made homemade knife out of everyday materials, especially prevalent in prisons among inmates. An alternate name in some prisons is shank.
Sword: An evolution of the knife with a lengthened and strengthened blade used primarily for mêlée combat and hunting.
Throwing knife: A knife designed and weighted for throwing.
Trench knife: Purpose-made or improvised knives, intended for close-quarter fighting, particularly in trench warfare; some have a d-shaped integral hand guard.
Sports equipment
Throwing knife: A knife designed and weighted for throwing.
Utensils
A primary aspect of the knife as a tool includes dining, used either in food preparation or as cutlery. Examples of this include:
Bread knife: A knife with a serrated blade for cutting bread
Boning knife: A knife used for removing the bones of poultry, meat, and fish.
Fillet Knife: A knife a with flexible blade used to separate meat or fish from bones.
Butcher's Knife: A knife designed and used primarily for the butchering and/or dressing of animals.
Carving knife: A knife for carving large cooked meats such as poultry, roasts, hams, and other large cooked meats.
Canelle or Channel knife: The notch of the blade is used to cut a twist from a citrus fruit, usually in the preparation of cocktails
Chef's knife: Also known as a French knife, a cutting tool used in preparing food
Cleaver: A large knife that varies in its shape but usually resembles a rectangular-bladed hatchet. It is used mostly for hacking through bones as a kitchen knife or butcher knife, and can also be used for crushing via its broad side, typically garlic.
Electric knife: An electrical device consisting of two serrated blades that are clipped together, providing a sawing action when powered on
Kitchen knife: Any knife, including the chef's knife, that is intended to be used in food preparation
Oyster knife: Has a short, thick blade for prying open oyster shells
Mezzaluna: A two-handled arc-shaped knife used in a rocking motion as an herb chopper or for cutting other foods
Paring or Coring Knife: A knife with a small but sharp blade used for cutting out the cores from fruit.
Rocker knife is a knife that cuts with a rocking motion, which is primarily used by people whose disabilities prevent them from using a fork and knife simultaneously.
Table knife or Case knife: A piece of cutlery, either a butter knife, steak knife, or both, that is part of a table setting, accompanying the fork and spoon
Tools
As a utility tool the knife can take many forms, including:
Bowie knife: Commonly, any large sheath knife, or a specific style of large knife popularized by Jim Bowie.
Bushcraft knife: A sturdy, normally fixed blade knife used while camping in the wilderness.
Camping knife: A camping knife is used for camping and survival purposes in a wilderness environment.
Head knife or Round knife: A knife with a semicircular blade used since antiquity to cut leather.
Crooked knife: Sometimes referred to as a "curved knife", "carving knife" or in the Algonquian language the "mocotaugan" is a utilitarian knife used for carving.
Diver's knife: A knife adapted for use in diving and water sports and a necessary part of standard diving dress.
Electrician's knife: A short-bladed knife used to cut electrical insulation. Also, a folding knife with a large screw driver as well as a blade. Typically the screwdriver locks, but the blade may not lock.
Folding knife: A folding knife is a knife with one or more blades that fit inside the handle that can still fit in a pocket. It is also known as a jackknife or jack-knife.
Hunting knife: A knife used to dress large game.
Kiridashi: A small Japanese knife having a chisel grind and a sharp point, used as a general-purpose utility knife.
Linoleum knife: is a small knife that has a short, stiff blade with a curved point and a handle and is used to cut linoleum or other sheet materials.
Machete: A large heavy knife used to cut through thick vegetation such as sugar cane or jungle undergrowth; it may be used as an offensive weapon.
Marking knife: A woodworking tool used for marking out workpieces.
Palette knife: A knife, or frosting spatula, lacking a cutting edge, used by artists for tasks such as mixing and applying paint and in cooking for spreading icing.
Paper knife: Or a "letter opener" it is a knife made of metal or plastic, used for opening mail.
Pocketknife: a folding knife designed to be carried in a pants pocket. Subtypes include:
Lockback knife: a folding knife with a mechanism that locks the blade into the open position, preventing accidental closure while in use
Multi-tool and Swiss Army knife, which combine a folding knife blade with other tools and implements, such as pliers, scissors, or screwdrivers
Produce knife: A knife with a rectangular profile and a blunt front edge used by grocers to cut produce.
Rigging knife: A knife used to cut rigging in sailing vessels.
Scalpel: A medical knife, used to perform surgery.
Straight razor: A reusable knife blade used for shaving hair.
Survival knife: A sturdy knife, sometimes with a hollow handle filled with survival equipment.
Switchblade: A knife with a folding blade that springs out of the grip when a button or lever on the grip is pressed.
Utility knife: A short knife with a replaceable (typically) triangular blade, used for cutting sheet materials including card stock, paperboard, and corrugated fiberboard, also called a boxcutter knife or boxcutter
Wood carving knife and whittling knives: Knives used to shape wood in the arts of wood carving and whittling, often with short, thin replaceable blades for better control.
Craft knife: A scalpel-like form of non-retractable utility knife with a (typically) long handle and a replaceable pointed blade, used for precise, clean cutting in arts and crafts, often called an X-acto knife in the US and Canada after the popular brand name.
Traditional and religious implements
Athame: A typically black-handled and double-edged ritual knife used in Wicca and other derivative forms of Neopagan witchcraft. (see also Boline).
Dirk: A long bladed thrusting dagger worn by Scottish Highlanders for customary and ceremonial purposes.
Katar: An Indian push dagger sometimes used ceremonially.
Kilaya: A dagger used in Tibetan Buddhist rituals.
Kirpan: A ceremonial knife that all baptised Sikhs must wear as one of the five visible symbols of the Sikh faith (Kakars)
Kris: A dagger used in Indo-Malay cultures, often by nobility and sometimes in religious rituals
Kukri: A Nepalese knife used as a tool and weapon
Maguro bōchō: A traditional Japanese knife with a long specialized blade that is used to fillet large ocean fish.
Puukko: A traditional Finnish style woodcraft belt-knife used as a tool rather than a weapon
Seax: A Germanic single-edged knife, dagger or short sword used both as a tool and as a weapon.
Sgian-dubh: A small knife traditionally worn with the Highland and Isle dress (Kilt) of Scotland.
Ulu: An Inuit woman's all-purpose knife with a handle directly above a highly curved blade.
Yakutian knife: A traditional Yakuts knife used as a tool for wood carving and meat or fish cutting. Can be used as a part of yakutian ethnic costume.
Rituals and superstitions
The knife plays a significant role in some cultures through ritual and superstition, as the knife was an essential tool for survival since early man. Knife symbols can be found in various cultures to symbolize all stages of life; for example, a knife placed under the bed while giving birth is said to ease the pain, or, stuck into the headboard of a cradle, to protect the baby; knives were included in some Anglo-Saxon burial rites, so the dead would not be defenseless in the next world. The knife plays an important role in some initiation rites, and many cultures perform rituals with a variety of knives, including the ceremonial sacrifices of animals. Samurai warriors, as part of bushido, could perform ritual suicide, or seppuku, with a tantō, a common Japanese knife. An athame, a ceremonial knife, is used in Wicca and derived forms of neopagan witchcraft.
In Greece, a black-handled knife placed under the pillow is used to keep away nightmares. As early as 1646 reference is made to a superstition of laying a knife across another piece of cutlery being a sign of witchcraft. A common belief is that if a knife is given as a gift, the relationship of the giver and recipient will be severed. Something such as a small coin, dove or a valuable item is exchanged for the gift, rendering "payment."
Legislation
Some types of knives are restricted by law, and carrying of knives may be regulated, because they are often used in crime, although restrictions vary greatly by jurisdiction and type of knife. For example, some laws prohibit carrying knives in public while other laws prohibit possession of certain knives, such as switchblades.

A knighting sword is a sword used by a monarch during an investiture ceremony in which a person is given an accolade and becomes a knight.
The knighting sword used by the British monarch Queen Elizabeth II was the sword she inherited from her father, George VI, from when he was Duke of York and colonel of the Scots Guard.

The Kongemose culture (Kongemosekulturen) was a Mesolithic hunter-gatherer culture in southern Scandinavia ca. 6000 BC–5200 BC and the origin of the Ertebølle culture. It was preceded by the Maglemosian culture. In the north it bordered on the Scandinavian Nøstvet and Lihult cultures.
The Kongemose culture is named after a location in western Zealand and its typical form is known from Denmark and Skåne. The finds are characterised by long flintstone flakes, used for making characteristic rhombic arrowheads, scrapers, drills, awls, and toothed blades. Tiny micro blades constituted the edges of bone daggers that were often decorated with geometric patterns. Stone axes were made of a variety of stones, and other tools were made of horn and bone. The main economy was based on hunting red deer, roe deer, and wild boar, supplemented by fishing at the coastal settlements.
Name origin
In the summer of 1952, during a series of drainage schemes that were being carried out in Kongemose, a portion of the Aamose area in West Zealand, a number of prehistoric findings came to light. The site was filled in again, but a year later other portions of the settlement were found in the nearby area while ploughing.
An excavation then started in 1954 to rescue the site, and after a rough procedure that lasted a year due to persistently bad weather, a 1.200 square meters settlement was unearthed. It shares similar objects with the "Early Coast Culture" of the nearby area, but it also presents some unique findings, such as a large flint pick and a bull-roarer, an ancient musical instrument mainly used for rituals.
The conducted pollen analysis dates the Kongemose site to a period broadly corresponding to Pollen Zone VI (ca. 7700 - 5500 BC).
Genetics

Ksar Akil Flake is an oval type of Lithic flake with fine, regular teeth at frequent intervals. The flint tool is named after the archaeological site of Ksar Akil in Lebanon, where several examples were found and suggested to date to the late Upper Paleolithic.
Two Ksar Akil Flakes are held by the National Museum of Beirut, marked as "level V", which had a base point at around 3 metres (9.8 ft) below datum. Other examples are held by the Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut, Lorraine Copeland and some are also likely to be among the Ksar Akil material held in London. Five other examples are held in the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory found at Borj Barajne in the Sands of Beirut along with two worn examples discovered at Antelias Cave. Another Ksar Akil flake was found at El-Emireh.

Kuridala Township site is a heritage-listed mining camp in the locality of Kuridala, Shire of Cloncurry, Queensland, Australia. It was built from 1880s to 1920s. It is also known as Hampden Township, Hampden Smelter, Kuridala Smelter, and Friezeland Township. It was added to the Queensland Heritage Register on 12 June 2009.
History
Copper was discovered at Kuridala in 1884 and the Hampden mine commenced during the 1890s. A Melbourne syndicate took over operations in 1897 and with increasing development of the mine in 1905–06 the Hampden Cloncurry Limited company was formed. The township was surveyed as Hampden in 1910 (later called Friezland, and finally Kuridala in 1916). The Hampden Smelter operated from 1911 to 1920 with World War I being a particularly prosperous time for the company. After the war the operations and the township declined and the Hampden Cloncurry company ceased to exist in 1928. Tribute mining and further exploration and testing of the ore body has continued from 1932 through to the present day.
The Kuridala Township and Hampden Smelter are located approximately 65 kilometres (40 mi) south of Cloncurry and 345 metres (1,132 ft) above sea level, on an open plain against a background of rugged but picturesque hills.
The Cloncurry copper fields were discovered by Ernest Henry in 1867 but lack of capital and transport combined with low base metal prices precluded any major development. However, rising prices, new discoveries in the region and the promise of a railway combined with an inflow of British capital stimulated development. Additionally, Melbourne based promoters eager to develop another base metal bonanza like Broken Hill led to a resurgence of interest, especially in the Hampden mines.
The copper deposits at Kuridala (initially named Hampden) were discovered by William McPhail and Robert Johnson on their pastoral lease, Eureka, in January 1884. The Hampden mine was held by Fred Gibson in the 1890s and acquired in 1897 by a Melbourne syndicate comprising the "Broken Hillionaires" - William Orr, William Knox and Herman Schlapp. They floated the Hampden Copper Mines N. L. with a capital of £100,000 in £100 shares of which 200 were fully paid up. With this capital they commenced a prospecting and stockpiling program sending specimens to Dapto and Wallaroo for testing. Government Geologist, W.E. Cameron's report on the district in 1900 discouraged investors as he reported that few of the lodes, other than the Hampden Company's main lode at Kuridala, were worth working.
A world price rise in copper in 1905 combined with a government decision in 1906 to extend the Great Northern railway (then connecting Townsville to Richmond) to Cloncurry, stimulated further development. The Hampden Cloncurry Copper Mines Limited was registered in Victoria in March 1906 to acquire the old company's mines. However, the company only had a working capital of £35,000 after distributing vendor's shares and buying the Duchess mines. During this period there were over 20 companies investing similarly on the Cloncurry field.
The township was surveyed by the Queensland Mines Department around 1910 and was first known as Hampden after the mines discovered in the 1880s. By 1912 it was called Friezland, however was officially renamed Kuridala in October 1916 to minimise confusion with another settlement in Queensland. The reason for this change was considered to be linked to German names being unpopular at the outbreak of World War I.
Hampden Cloncurry Copper Mines Limited and its competitor, Mount Elliott, formed a special company in 1908 to finance and construct the railway extension from Cloncurry through Malbon, to Kuridala and Mount Elliott. The company reconstructed in July 1909 by increasing its capitalisation, and concluding arrangements for a debenture issue to be secured against its proposed smelters. Its smelters were not fired until March 1911 and over the next three years 85,266 long tons (86,634 t) of ore were treated with an initial dividend of £140,000 being declared in 1913. In one month in 1915 the Hampden Smelter produced 813 long tons (826 t) of copper, an Australian record at that time.
Concern over the dwindling reserves of high grade ore led to William Henry Corbould, the general manager of Mount Elliott mines, negotiating an amalgamation with Hampden Cloncurry to halt the fierce rivalry. But the latter was uninterested having consolidated its prospects in 1911 by acquiring many promising mines in the region, and enlarging its smelters and erecting new converters. In 1913, following a fire in the Hampden Consol's mine, Corbould convinced his London directors to reopen negotiations for a joint venture in the northern section of the field which still awaited a railway. Although Corbould and Huntley, the Hampden Cloncurry general manager, inspected many properties, the proposal lapsed.
The railway reached the township by 1910. A sanitary system was installed in 1911, after a four-month typhoid epidemic, and a hospital erected by 1913, run by Dr. Old. It was described as the best and most modern hospital in the northwest. At its height the town supported six hotels, five stores, four billiard saloons, three dance halls and a cinema, two ice works and one aerated waters factory, and Chinese gardens along the creek.There were also drapers, fruiterer, butcher, baker, timber merchant, garage, four churches, police station, court house, post office, banks and a school with up to 280 pupils. A cyclone in December 1918 damaged the town and wrecked part of the powerhouse and smelter.
A comprehensive description of the plant and operations of the Kuridala Hampden mines and smelters was given by the Cloncurry mining warden in the Queensland Government Mining Journal of 14 September 1912. Ore from other company-owned mines (Duchess, Happy Salmon, MacGregor and Trekelano) was railed in via a 1.2-kilometre (0.75 mi) branch line to the reduction plant bins, while the heavy pyrites ore from the Hampden mines was separated at the main shaft into coarse and fine products and conveyed to separate 1,500-long-ton (1,500 t) capacity bins over a standard gauge railway to the plant.
A central power plant was installed with three separate Dowson pressure gas plants powered by three tandem type Kynoch gas engines of 320 horsepower (240 kW) and two duplex type Hornsby gas engines of 200 horsepower (150 kW). Two Swedish General Electric Company generators of 1,250 kilowatts (1,680 hp) and 56 kilowatts (75 hp) running at 460 volts, supplied electricity to the machines in the works, fitting shops and mine pumps. Electric light for the mine and works was supplied by a British Thompson-Houston generator of 42 kilowatts (56 hp), running at 420 volts. The fuel used in the gas producers was bituminous coal, coke or charcoal, made locally in the retorts.
The reduction plant consisted of two water-jacket furnaces, 2.1 by 1 metre (6 ft 11 in by 3 ft 3 in) and 4.2 by 1 metre (13.8 by 3.3 ft), with dust chambers and a 52-metre (171 ft) high steel stack. There were two electrically driven converter vessels, each 3.2 by 2.3 metres (10.5 by 7.5 ft). The molten product ran into a 3.7-metre (12 ft) diameter forehearth, while the slag was drawn off into double ton slag pots, run to the dump over 3-foot (0.91 m) gauge, 42-pound (19 kg) steel rail tracks. The copper was delivered from the forehearth to the converters. A 1.06-metre (3 ft 6 in) gauge track ran under the converters and carried the copper mould cars to the cleaning and shipping shed, at the end of which was the siding for railing out the cakes of blister copper.
The war conferred four years of prosperity on the Cloncurry district despite marketing, transport and labour difficulties. The Hampden Cloncurry Company declared liberal dividends during 1915–18: £40,000, £140,000, £52,500 and £35,000 making a total disbursement since commencing operations of £437,500. Its smelters treated over a quarter of a million tons of ore in this period, averaging over 70,000 long tons (71,000 t) annually. The company built light railways to its mines (e.g. Wee MacGregor railway and Trekelano) to ensure regular ore supplies and to reduce transport costs. In order to improve its ore treatment, Hampden Cloncurry installed a concentration plant in 1917. In 1918 an Edwards furnace was erected to pre-roast fine sulphide concentrates from the mill before smelting.
The dropping of the copper price control by the British government in 1918 forced the company into difficulties. Smelting was postponed until September 1919 and the company lost heavily during the next season and had to rely on ores from the Trekelano mine. Its smelter treated 69,598 long tons (70,715 t) of ore in 1920, but the company was forced to halt all operations after the Commonwealth Bank withdrew funds on copper awaiting export.
Companies and mines turned to the Theodore Labor Government for assistance but they were unsympathetic to the companies, even though they alone had the capacity to revive the Cloncurry field. More negotiations for amalgamation occurred in 1925 but failed, and in 1926 Hampden Cloncurry offered its assets for sale by tender and Mount Elliott acquired them all except for the Trekelano mine. The company was de-listed in 1928.
The rise and decline of the township reflected the company's fortunes. In 1913 there were 1,500 people increasing to 2,000 by 1920, but by 1924 this had declined to 800. With the rise of Mount Isa, Kaiser's bakehouse, the hospital, courthouse, one ice works and picture theatre, moved there in 1923 followed by Boyds' Hampden Hotel (renamed the Argent) in 1924. Other buildings including the police residence and Clerk of Petty Sessions house were moved to Cloncurry.
In its nine years of smelting Hampden Cloncurry had been one of Australia's largest mining companies producing 50,800 long tons (51,600 t) of copper (compared with Mount Elliott's 27,000), 21,000 ounces (600,000 g) of gold and 381,000 ounces (10,800,000 g) of silver. A more permanent achievement was its part in creating the metal fabricating company, Metal Manufacturers Limited, of which it was one of the four founders in 1916. Much of the money which built their Port Kembla works into one of the country's largest manufacturers came from the now derelict smelters in north-west Queensland.
In 1942 Mount Isa Mines bought the Kuridala Smelters for £800 and used parts to construct a copper furnace which commenced operating in April 1943 in response to wartime demands. The Tunny family continued to live at Kuridala as tributers on the Hampden and Consol mines from 1932 until 1969 and worked the mines down to 15.25 metres (50.0 ft). A post office operated until 1975 and the last inhabitant, Lizzy Belch, moved into Cloncurry about 1982.
Further exploration and testing of the Kuridala ore body has occurred from 1948 up until the present with activities being undertaking by Mount Isa Mines, Broken Hill South, Enterprise Exploration, Marshall and James Boyd, Australian Selection, Kennecott Exploration, Carpentaria Exploration, Metana Minerals, A.M. Metcalfe, Dampier Mining Co Ltd, Newmont Pty Ltd, Australian Anglo American, Era South Pacific Pty Ltd, CRA Exploration Pty Ltd, BHP Minerals Ltd, Metana Minerals and Matrix Metals Ltd.
Description
Town area
The township site, with surviving foundations and archaeological evidence of commercial and residential buildings and activities, covers an area of approximately 1.5 kilometres (0.93 mi) (north-south) by 1.2 kilometres (0.75 mi) (east-west). The surveyed town site runs roughly parallel with, and on the eastern side of, the Hampden line of reef. Evidence of commercial buildings is present in the south-west corner of the town site between a stock bore east of the Hampden Consol chimney and an early town well. Foundations and concrete surfaces remain for the bakery, hotel/store, and butcher's shop and other unidentified premises. The skating rink, police station, mine manager's house and hospital have also been identified archaeologically. Residential sites generally appear as cleared earth surfaces with ironstone or white quartz edging. The hospital site is located on a small hill to the east and contains a large iron water tank base and cast iron oven. A wide range of domestic artefacts are in evidence across the town area. These include food containers such as glass bottles, ceramic tableware, and metal tins for products from kerosene and matches to sardines and tobacco.
Cemetery
The cemetery is situated towards the southern end of the site, west of the Hampden line of reef. The cemetery is clearly marked and was re- fenced in 1988–89. There are two gazetted cemetery reserves adjacent to the township (Lots 3SW23 and 5SW25). The actual cemetery is located 400 metres (1,300 ft) east of Lot 5SW25, and is not located within the boundaries of either of the gazetted cemetery areas. There are over 360 graves which can be identified in the cemetery consisting of 18 rows with 20 graves per row. Many graves have headstones with 40 being marked and dating from 1909 to 1920. Most headstones are by Melrose and Fenwick, Townsville. Some graves have railings but lack identification of the person buried. Many grave boundaries are marked by early 20th Century cast iron beds with full or half testers. Smaller framed beds denote children's or infants' graves. Several grave crosses have been fashioned from kerosene tins. Several graves were noted in 1989 as having dilapidated wooden surrounds. Other graves are visible only from soil disturbance, while it is possible there are still others which are not so clearly visible.
Railway station and railway line
The railway station site is immediately north of the cemetery at the junction of the smelter spur line. The station office is identified by a cement rendered surface with other foundations and tank bases within a 30-metre (98 ft) radius. Timber sleepers are still in place along sections of the railway formation. Embankments and cuttings still identify the route of the Cloncurry-Kuridala railway line and there is a wide range of archaeological material associated with the station and the line still present.
Other settlement and industrial sites
A wide range of other settlement sites outside the confines of the planned township occur across the landscape. There is an apparent randomness to the sites; however it is likely that there was far more method in site selection than is presently apparent. Examples of these sites include deposits of bottle glass, ceramic vessel fragments, metal artefacts, bricks and other domestic material.
Smelter
The remains of the smelter-works includes a blast furnace, concrete engine mounts and an iron chimney. A large, well-formed slag dump extends northward from the smelter. Adjacent to the furnace is a second iron chimney, powerhouse foundations and roasting furnace. The steel plate chimneys and parts of the smelter are all heavily rusted and the foundations are showing signs of heavy cracking.
Mine areas
Foundations and remnants of four early mines occur along the north- south line of the Hampden reef. Northernmost is the Hampden No. 2 containing a multi-tube boiler, beam pump and waster material. Logs remain at the former sawmill site south of Hampden No. 2. Further south and about 200 metres (660 ft) east of the smelter is the Hampden No.1 mine and plant foundations at the base of a high tailings dump. This mine contains the largest group of foundations including crusher and winch mounts. A beam pump arm is located at the collar of the main shaft. Further south, at the Hampden No. 3 shaft, remains include a headframe, winder house, waste heaps and boiler on a brick mounting. The bricks are manufactured from slag demonstrating an innovative and rare use of recycled slag. The Hampden Consol mine to the south retains an iron chimney on a rendered brick base which is inscribed AD 1913. Evidence at the site includes engine house remains, foundations and waste heaps. Other shafts and underground operations are likely to remain where there is the existence of shafts and levels. These remnants are likely to provide useful information on tunnelling techniques, the use of pit props, and design of ore hauling mechanisms.
Heritage listing
Kuridala Township, Hampden Smelter and Mining Complex was listed on the Queensland Heritage Register on 12 June 2009 having satisfied the following criteria.
The Kuridala Township, Hampden Smelter and Mining Complex has the potential to reveal important information about Queensland's history including a better understanding of copper mining practices and the pattern of settlement in North Queensland. The Kuridala complex was one of the first of a cluster of significant copper mining interests in the rich mineral field near Cloncurry.
Kuridala Township, Hampden Smelter and Mining Complex features extensive archaeological evidence relating to a wide range of mining activities. The early smelter works are the most complete works of this type in North Queensland. The Hampden Smelter is equipped with a rare, early water-jacket blast furnace, which is now unique as the only surviving example of its type in Queensland. A large, intact and well-formed slag dump at the site is second only in size to the dump at Chillagoe smelters. Archaeological examination of the smelter works will provide an understanding of the technology and practices in early copper processing in Queensland.
Archaeological investigations of the township area of Kuridala will provide answers to a range of questions relating to the social dynamics of the community and its establishment, development, interaction, and decline. Analysis of the archaeological artefacts particularly in domestic contexts will provide information on issues such as ethnicity, gender and the daily lives of the residents of Kuridala. The remains of the township will provide information on the pattern and spatial organisation of the settlement, and have the potential to answer questions about the isolation and integration of communities and of community identity. An understanding of the collective experiences of isolated mining communities may also be gained through further research into the site, particularly given the level of intra-site complexity.
The cemetery, one of the largest with mining associations in North Queensland, has the potential to provide further information about the community. Analysis of the types and styles of burials and grave markers, the layout and organisation of the cemetery, and the information from the grave markers about those individuals buried, has the potential to reveal information on such research questions as ethnicity, religion and social division within the community. Archaeological analysis of the remains of those buried in the cemetery also has the potential to reveal details of the health and living conditions of the residents of the township.
Given the isolated nature of the community and its distance from established centres of regulation, examination of the archaeological evidence may shed light on disparities between what was regulated or documented and what actually occurred at the site. For example, as identified during previous archaeological surveys of the site in 1989 and 1995, the town plan shows neat streets to the east of the mines and smelter and southwest of the Hampden consol, but the archaeological evidence shows domestic settlement extending to the south, in isolated pockets to the north of the smelter and west of the mines.
The association of the township and industrial areas at the Kuridala complex also provides for comparative and complementary research into other copper mining operations with associated township remains in North Queensland, including Mount Cuthbert Township and Kalkadoon Mine and Mount Elliott Smelter and Selwyn Township.
Archaeological investigations at the former Kuridala Township, Hampden Smelter and Mining Complex also have potential to answer important research questions including but not limited to labour relations, class, and capitalism.

Kurth Kiln was established by the Forests Commission Victoria in 1941 on a site about 7 km north of Gembrook on the Tomahawk Creek.
Dr Ernest Edgar Kurth from the University of Tasmania was commissioned to design the kiln with the aim of mass-producing charcoal as an alternative fuel in the response to war-time petrol rationing.
Gembrook was selected as the ideal site for the Kurth Kiln because it fully met three essential criteria required for successful operation;
Water - the kiln required 2000 gallons (9,100 litres) of water per day in order for its cooling systems to be effective.
Wood - the kiln burnt about 28 cords (~100 cubic metres) of wood per week.
Gradient - sloping land enabled easier top loading of wood into the kiln.
Dr Kurth was paid £5 for the use of his patented design (No 2563/41) and the total cost of establishing the kiln was 1,799 pounds 17 shillings and 2 pence.
The kiln commenced operation in March 1942 but transport difficulties combined with an oversupply of charcoal from private operators meant the kiln was used only intermittently during 1943 and was shut down soon after. Over the period of its operation, Kurth Kiln produced only 471 tons of charcoal which represented a tiny fraction of Victoria’s total production.
Petrol rationing
Australia’s declaration of War on 2 September 1939 immediately raised concerns about the security of petrol supplies. At the time Australia was totally reliant on imported fuel and had a limited storage capacity. At the start of the war, the country had sufficient petrol for only three months supply and by May 1940 the Commonwealth Oil Board estimated that only 67 per cent of the total capacity of about 140 million gallons was on-hand.
The Federal Government considered increasing the price of fuel to dampen demand. Another plan was that petrol should be merchandised in two colours, blue for commercial vehicles, and red for private cars, with red petrol being substantially more expensive than blue. The motoring industry and newspapers resisted the changes.
When France collapsed, the Minister for Supply stressed to Cabinet that continuity of the already erratic deliveries was under threat, and on 6 June 1940 Cabinet finally made the decision that rationing should be introduced to reduce consumption by 50 per cent. Political expediency came into play and petrol rationing was introduced in September 1940 and restrictions were tightened as the War progressed.
On 17 June 1941 the Prime Minister, Robert Menzies announced further restrictions to motorists limiting them to two gallons per month which were enough for 1,000 miles per year so many simply put their cars up on blocks for the duration and switched to public transport or walked. The scheme finally devised for petrol rationing coupons was complicated, and the paperwork was profuse. Drivers had to apply for a petrol licence, from which they were allocated ration tickets based on an assessment of their needs.
Forests Commission firefighting vehicles were exempt from the petrol restrictions. District Foresters were authorised to issue petrol coupons for timber industry trucks, which, in the absence of private cars and utes, often served as family transport too. Country school buses were fitted with gas converters and on declared days of Acute Fire Danger they were banned. Some of Melbourne's buses also ran on charcoal.
Petrol rationing was not strictly enforced until 1942 but remained in place until February 1950.
Charcoal as a replacement fuel
During the first half of the twentieth century charcoal production in Victoria was small and employed relatively few people. The charcoal was supplied to blacksmiths, coal depots, gas works and some powerhouses. The main areas of State forest producing charcoal were in a broad arc across Central Victoria at places like Beaufort, Trentham, Lionville, Macedon, Broadford, the Dandenongs and Gembrook. Charcoal was also produced in East Gippsland, mainly at Nowa Nowa. The best trees were durable species like red ironbark (Eucalyptus sideroxylon), red box (E. polyanthemos), grey box (E. microcarpa), yellow box (E. mellidora), red gum (E. camadulensis) and for lighter grades of charcoal, yellow stringybark (E. meullerana).
The charcoal was produced by slow and controlled burning of wood in earthen, brick or metal kilns. The simplest method was the "beehive kiln" where wood was stacked vertically into a conical heap to allow air and smoke movement and then covered with a layer of sticks and twigs. The stack was then covered further with a thick layer of earth and ash. Once the stack was alight the small chimney opening at the top was sealed. It then required constant tending to ensure no air entered the stack and took about three days to reduce the wood to charcoal. Large beehive kilns each contained about 50 cords of wood and were very labour intensive. They also produced charcoal of uneven consistency with a high ash content and some inevitable soil contamination. Other charcoal producers opted for lined pits in the ground, steel chambers or recycled boilers.
With the urging of the Federal Government charcoal quickly emerged as a substitute fuel in response to the national petrol rationing. A special vehicle-mounted unit which converted charcoal into flammable gases (principally carbon monoxide and hydrogen) was known to be suitable to power internal combustion engines.
Charcoal was relatively simple to produce but had a well-deserved reputation for being inconvenient to use for short trips, inefficient, under powered, dirty, belching black smoke, catching fire and occasionally exploding. Also, the cost of installation of a heavy and cumbersome producer gas kit was about £100, or the equivalent of 16 times the average weekly wage, and a bag of charcoal lasted between 30 and 60 miles at a cost between 6 and 10 shillings. Charcoal had a cost advantage over petrol and tests earlier in 1938-39 indicated savings in the order 80% for truck operations for producer gas compared to the cost of petrol. At the time, a new car, if you could get one, cost around £250 for a small Austin and £525 for a large Buick.
Over the war-years, some 56,000 gas producer units of varying design were fitted to private and commercial vehicles in Australia. This low conversion rate to producer gas technology represented less than 6.5% of all vehicles on the road by 1944.
The overall consumption of charcoal in Victoria rose thirtyfold from about 110 tons per month before the War to over 3300 tons by mid-1942. This massive increase required nearly 280,000 tones of dry wood annually to feed the hundreds of kilns set up across State forests, as well as on private land, at a time when labour was critically short.
Forests Commission Victoria
The task of ensuring adequate supplies of charcoal fell to the Forests Commission Victoria (FCV). It subsequently formed the State Charcoal Branch to organise the increased production of charcoal, to build up reserves to meet emergencies and to regulate the cost to consumers. The assistance of an expert Advisory Panel, representing charcoal producers, manufacturers and distributors of vehicle gas equipment, the Department of Supply and Development, and the Victorian Automobile Chamber of Commerce, was enlisted under the Chairman of the Forests Commission, Alfred Vernon Galbraith. Preliminary arrangements were made for bag supplies, for railway sidings in Melbourne, and for processing of charcoal bought by the Branch in excess of the requirements of private grading firms. In its first year, 17,421 tons of charcoal were produced compared with 1,650 tons before the War. Production peaked at 38,922 tons in 1942-43.
The Commission had the added responsibility of providing emergency firewood to Melbourne for heating and cooking purposes as a result of reductions in the supply of coal, electricity and gas. The Emergency Firewood Project continued long after the war ended and over the period from 1941 to 1954, nearly 2 million tons of firewood was produced.
An estimated 221 kilns and 12 pits were producing charcoal by the middle of 1942. Some of the labour was provided by Italian wartime internees. There were also over 600 commercial kilns operating mostly on private property. At least 50 to 60 private charcoal retorts were set up in the Barmah forest alone. The majority of the kilns were metal retorts because charcoal from earthen beehive kilns or unlined pits proved unsuitable for motor vehicles, causing gumming of engine valves and the controls in the gas lines due to the condensation of tar.
The Chairman of the Forests Commission, Alfred Vernon Galbraith became aware of experiments by Dr Ernest Kurth, Professor of Chemistry at the University of Tasmania who had been experimenting with the pyrolysis of wood and kiln designs since 1940. His work led to a quarter-size prototype kiln at Dover, Tasmania in March 1941. A second operational kiln was built at a sawmill near Launceston in January 1942.
In July 1941, Professor Kurth provided details of his kiln design and nine pages of handwritten notes on its operation to Galbraith which marked the beginning of the project at Gembrook.
The kiln was unusual in that it could operate continually with the top loading of wood billets and bottom recovery of charcoal. A water-cooled grate at the bottom of the stack caused the brittle charred wood to crumble under its own weight into manageable pieces, while at the same time maintaining the charring temperature at the critical point to produce a consistent quality charcoal. Not only was this process said to be 50% faster than any other method then in use, but it was also 10-15% more efficient. So cooled charcoal was raked out the bottom as more wood was added into the top.
Tests in Tasmania indicated that the prototype could produce about 1.4 tons of charcoal per day which compared favourably with a single ton every three days from a standard steel kiln.
Seven tons of wood produced one ton of charcoal with an output of 20 tons per week if the kiln was operated continuously with three shifts per day.
The cost of building the kiln was estimated to be about half that required for five or six portable steel kilns needed to produce the same quantity. Good quality charcoal sold for 4s 6d for a 50 lb bag.
The claimed advantages could not be ignored by an organisation under pressure to secure Victoria's war-time charcoal supplies, so Galbraith enclosed £5 to Professor Kurth in a letter on 16 July 1941 for the use of his patented design.
Gembrook site
The selection of the suitable site on State forest for Professor Kurth's kiln depended on adequate supplies of water, wood, and gradient.
Firstly, the kiln needed approximately 2000 gallons (9100 litres) per day for its cooling system, secondly, it needed about 28 cords (100 cubic metres) of wood per week as feedstock, and thirdly a slope of approximately 18 feet (6 metres) was required to facilitate top loading. The site chosen at Tomahawk Creek about 7 km north of Gembrook met all these requirements.
Water was supplied by an old mining race from the Tomahawk Creek which also powered a water wheel operating a vibrating screen to grade the charcoal before bagging.
Much of the Gembrook landscape had been cleared for agriculture, supported a thriving timber industry and also mined for gold and gemstones since 1859 so most of the older mature forest had been disturbed in some way. More importantly, a large area of older and damaged messmate trees (Eucalyptus obliqua) in the nearby State forest had been deliberately ringbarked as a silvicultural treatment to encourage new regeneration growth by Forests Commission unemployment relief workers some 10 years earlier during the 1930s depression. Approximately 145 men had worked over nearly 4000 acres during 1930-31. This left a large amount of standing dry wood suitable for the kilns operation within a one-mile radius.
Access to roads and the railway station at Gembrook for transport was an important consideration. There was also a critical shortage of labour to operate the kiln during the war years which was exacerbated by a major timber salvage program underway in the Central Highlands after the deadly 1939 Black Friday bushfires. Although the site at Gembrook had not been severely burnt in either 1926 or 1939.
Earth works commenced in late August 1941. A construction contract for the kiln was awarded to builders Stanley and Nance of Middle Park on 17 October and the detailed design work was done by the Forests Commission’s own architect, Mr S. J. B. Hart. Building commenced in November and by 18 December 1941 was nearly completed. The architect reported on 11 February 1942 to the Secretary of the Forests Commission that the kiln was ready for operations after a small trial run. The project cost £1799 17s 2d which included the establishment of the site, construction of the kiln, erection of buildings, purchase of equipment, the connection of telephone and supply of water. It was a sizable investment.
The kiln was a rectangular structure 4m x 3.5m x 8m high on a concrete foundation and the red brick walls were reinforced with iron strapping. The kiln held 25 tons of 3-feet-long billets per load which were carried up on a small inclined tramway to be loaded into the top.
The initial firing was on 18 March 1942 and after some initial teething problems with the steel doors the kiln was in full production by mid-1942. Combustion took two days to complete and kiln produced 243 tons of charcoal for its first financial year 1941-42. But in the latter half of the year, this reduced to only 29 tons.
Production by July 1942 had been so successful that problems of storage soon became apparent. Commissioner Finton George Gerraty reported that about 70 tons of graded charcoal was stockpiled and the storage sheds were taxed to the limit. Production was suspended to solve this short-term problem. However, at the same time the kiln suffered further structural problems. An inspection in September 1942 indicated that major repairs were required to some loosening brickwork near the inspection doors and this together with the emerging oversupply of charcoal raised serious questions about Kurth Kilns future.
Continuing transport and distribution difficulties from Gembrook combined with an oversupply of charcoal from private operators meant the kiln was used only intermittently during 1943 and was shut down soon after.
Petrol rationing also eased at the end of the War reducing the demand for charcoal but didn't end until 1950.
Over the total period of its operation, Kurth Kiln produced 471 tons of charcoal which represented only a tiny fraction of Victoria’s total production. But Kurth Kiln was a victim of circumstance and not the "white elephant" that these low production figures might suggest.
Forest workers camp
After the cessation of war hostilities, the Kallista District of the Forests Commission advised in February 1946, that they could absorb 40 returned servicemen for silvicultural, afforestation, fire protection, and utilisation works. This was part of a five-year statewide plan drawn up and approved by the Allied Works Council [1] with funding allocated for the first two-year period totalling £3,842,175. Similar camps were established on State forest to house and employ migrants and refugees from war-torn Europe.[2] Archived 2018-08-09 at the Wayback Machine
To provide accommodation, eighteen masonite huts were purchased from the Army and erected at the site. By July 1946 the Commission decided to make Kurth Kiln its main base camp for the region to house 80 to 100 men. The forest camp operated continuously until 8 January 1963 when three huts were burnt by bushfires. The remaining buildings began to slowly deteriorate and construction of an all-weather road network meant workmen could be housed at nearby townships instead. The site declined through to the 1970s. Three huts were demolished and the material used to modify a remaining one as a caretaker’s residence in about 1984 for Ron Thornton who lived on-site for another 16 years. The sheds were then mainly used as storage of eucalyptus seed needed for regeneration works and for Forests Commission equipment such and pumps and hoses. The small dam next to the kiln was regularly used to as a pump school to prepare staff for the summer fire season.
Kurth kiln began its transformation into a picnic ground in about 1978 led by District Forester Frank May with works supervised by two local overseers Tom Steege and Bob Ferris.
The site is now registered as historical and scientific significance with Kurth Kiln being included as an indicative place on the Register of the National Estate (004495) as well as being listed in the Heritage Inventory of archaeological sites maintained by Heritage Victoria (H8022-0013). Remnants of a historic steel charcoal kiln can also still be found at nearby Tonimbuk and another at Kinglake West.
Parks Victoria is now responsible for Kurth Kiln and has undertaken conservation works on several of the most urgent building repairs. A small and active volunteer friends group formed in June 1999 which helps to protect and interpret the site.
Gallery

A Köte (also Köthe) is the term used in the Harz Mountains of central Germany for a charcoal burner's hut (Köhlerhütte). A Köte was occupied by a charcoal burner in order to look after a nearby wood pile (Kohlenmeiler). The charcoal burner prepared the necessary charcoal for the smelting of ores.
Today, Köten are used for tourism purposes as shelters and rest stops for hikers.
Examples
There are replicas of Köten in the Harz, for example at these places:
Köte am Heidenstieg (51°50′26.7″N 10°25′24.3″E), in the Schulenberg Forest northwest of and above Schulenberg im Oberharz between the Großer (645.4 m) and Kleiner Wiesenberg (512.5 m above sea level (NHN)) at about 521 m on the Heidenstieg; as No. 124 in the system of checkpoints in the Harzer Wandernadel hiking network
Köte am Schindelkopf (51°43′23″N 10°20′11″E), in the Osterode Municipal Forest east of Osterode am Harz on the northwestern slopes of the Schindelkopf (ca. 629 m above sea level (NHN)) at about 570 m on the Nassen Weg; as No. 143 in the system of checkpoints of the Harzer Wandernadel
Gallery

LANSA Flight 508 was a Lockheed L-188A Electra turboprop operated as a scheduled domestic passenger flight by Lineas Aéreas Nacionales Sociedad Anonima (LANSA) that crashed in a thunderstorm en route from Lima to Pucallpa in Peru on 24 December 1971, killing 91 people – all 6 crew on board and 85 of its 86 passengers. As a result of a lightning bolt strike to the right-hand wing, the aircraft crashed down into the Amazon rainforest. Whilst several of the passengers initially survived the 3 km (2 mi) fall to earth, only one person, German Juliane Koepcke, was able to leave the crash site and hike for 11 days to safety. It is regarded in popular retellings as the deadliest lightning strike disaster in aviation history.
Accident
LANSA Flight 508 departed Lima’s Jorge Chávez International Airport shortly before noon on 24 December 1971 on its way to Iquitos in north-eastern Peru, with a scheduled stop at Pucallpa. Whilst cruising at FL210 (6.4 km or 4 mi) above mean sea level, the Lockheed L-188A Electra entered an area of severe thunderstorms and turbulence. Consequently, the aircraft was struck by lightning on its right wing. A fire broke out, and the aircraft suffered structural failure, with the right wing and part of the left wing separating in flight. Later analysis of the flight recorder indicated that the break-up occurred around 12:45, about fifteen minutes before the aircraft was due to land at Pucallpa. The aeroplane then crashed in flames into a jungle located in a mountainous terrain in the region of Puerto Inca.
Victims and sole survivor
The sole survivor was 17-year-old Juliane Koepcke, whom whilst still strapped to her seat fell 3 km (2 mi) into the Amazon rainforest. She survived the fall with a broken collarbone, cruciate ligament tear in her left knee, deep laceration to her right arm, eye injury, and concussion. One hour after the fall, she gained her consciousness and was able to trek through the dense Amazon jungle for 11 days. By following a stream, she eventually found shelter in a hut of local hunters and woodcutters, who found her and took her by canoe back to civilisation.
As many as 14 other passengers were also later found to have survived the crash, but died awaiting rescue, including Koepcke's mother.
Aftermath
Some evidence showed the crew decided to continue the flight despite the hazardous weather ahead, apparently because of pressure to meet the holiday schedule. Peruvian investigators concluded that the structural failure was caused by the extreme loads imposed while flying through the thunderstorm, compounded by stresses from a manoeuvre to level the aircraft; citing "intentional flight into hazardous weather conditions" as a cause of the crash. The Electra was LANSA's last aircraft; the company lost its operating permit eleven days later.
The sole survivor, Juliane Koepcke, later became the director of the Panguana Foundation, which works closely with local Indigenous communities to advocate for the conservation and protection of the Panguana region’s biodiversity.
In popular culture
The movie Miracles Still Happen (1974) is based on the story. Koepcke's story was also told in the documentary film Wings of Hope (1998) by director Werner Herzog, who had narrowly avoided taking the same flight, when his reservation had been cancelled due to a last minute change in itinerary.
Koepcke's memoir Als ich vom Himmel fiel (English: When I Fell From the Sky) was published by the German publisher Piper Malik on 10 March 2011.
The crash also features in the final season one episode of the Discovery Channel documentary Aircrash Confidential. The episode was first aired in 2011, and features an interview with Koepcke.

Lamprodila rutilans, known as the linden jewel beetle, is a European species of metallic wood-boring beetles associated with linden trees. Adult beetles have elongated, oval body shape with a length of 11-15 mm. Their coloration is variable, but most often dominated by metallic green color with scattered black spots on elytra. They are typically found in towns and villages on linden trees in tree alleys and parks.
Distribution
L. rutilans lives in southern, central, and eastern Europe. In Fennoscandia, it can be found only in southern Norway. The subspecies podolica lives in Ukraine and Russia.
Life cycle
The xylophagous larvae develop in or under the bark of old but still-living linden trees of the species Tilia platyphyllos or T. cordata. Development usually takes two years in central Europe and one year in southern Europe. The larvae pupate in April. Adults emerge through elliptical openings and are active from May to July. Females lay eggs into cracks of tree bark.
Behavior
The process of emerging from bark is laborious for the adult beetles and can take several hours. On hot, sunny days, the adult beetles can be seen flying around their host trees and sitting on their bark and leaves, preferring sun-dazzled branches. Males prefer the upper parts of the tree. The adults are not attracted by flowers.

The Langdale axe industry (or factory) is the name given by archaeologists to a Neolithic centre of specialised stone tool production in the Great Langdale area of the English Lake District. The existence of the site, which dates from around 4,000–3,500 BC, was suggested by chance discoveries in the 1930s. More systematic investigations were undertaken by Clare Fell and others in the 1940s and 1950s, since when several field surveys of varying scope have been carried out.
Typical finds include reject axes, rough-outs and blades created by knapping large lumps of the rock found in the scree or perhaps by simple quarrying or opencast mining. Hammerstones have also been found in the scree and other lithic debitage from the industry such as blades and flakes.
The area has outcrops of fine-grained greenstone or hornstone suitable for making polished stone axes. Such axes have been found distributed across Great Britain. The rock is an epidotised greenstone quarried or perhaps just collected from the scree slopes in the Langdale Valley on Harrison Stickle and Pike of Stickle. The nature and extent of the axe-flaking sites making up the Langdale Axe Factory complex are still under investigation.
Geological mapping has established that the volcanic tuff used for the axes outcrops along a narrow range of the highest peaks in the locality. Other outcrops in the area are known to have been worked, especially on Harrison Stickle, and Scafell Pike where rough-outs and flakes have been found on platforms below the peaks at and above the 2000- or 3000-foot level.
Recent research has shown that Langdale tuff was used for tools before the Neolithic 'axe factories' were established. In Maryport (Cumbria) it was selected for tool manufacture in the Final Palaeolithic and Mesolithic
Petrographic analysis
Archaeologists are able to identify the unique nature of the Langdale stone by taking sections and examining them using microscopy. The minerals in the rock have a characteristic pattern, using a method known as petrography. They have been able to reconstruct the production methods and trade patterns employed by the axe makers. The Langdale industry produced roughly hewn (or so-called "rough-outs") axes and simple blocks. The highly polished final product were usually made elsewhere, such as at Ehenside Tarn in the western fringes of the Lake District, and all were traded on throughout Britain and Ireland. The Langdale tuff was among the most common of the various rocks used to make axes in the Neolithic period, and are known as Group VI axes. Flint was also commonly used to make polished axes, and mined at several places, but especially at Grimes Graves and Cissbury, and in continental Europe at Spiennes in Belgium, and Krzemionki in Poland.
Polishing the rough surfaces will have improved the mechanical strength of the axe as well as lowering friction when used against wood. Fractures occur more easily in brittle materials like stone when rough owing to the stress concentrations present at sharp corners, holes and other defects in the axe surface. Removing those defects by polishing makes the axe much stronger, and able to withstand impact and shock loads from use. Sandstone was usually used for polishing axes, and whetstones have been found nearby at Ehenside tarn, for example where the rough-outs were polished. Large fixed outcrops were also widely used for polishing, and there are numerous examples across Europe, but relatively few in Britain. That at Fyfield Down near Avebury is an exception, but there must be many more awaiting discovery and publication.
Distribution and use
The stone axes from Langdale have been found at archaeological sites across Britain and Ireland. An unusual concentration of finds occurs in the East of England, particularly Lincolnshire. Francis Pryor attributes this to these axes being particularly valued in this region. He mentions possible religious significance of the axes, perhaps related to the high peaks from which they came. He compares this with confirmed Neolithic flint mines which, apart from Grime's Graves (where flint of exceptionally high quality was mined), were all at prominent elevated locations.
Of all the Neolithic polished stone axes that have been examined in the UK, around 27% come from the Langdale region. This is notable considering there were over 30 sources of material for stone axes from Cornwall to northern Scotland and Ireland.
Whether religious objects or not, the axes must have been of high value, given that they have been "traded" so widely. Some axes appear worn whilst others appear unused, again implying that they were regarded as sacred objects or, perhaps, simply as a display of visible wealth. Some though were used as practical tools. The shape of the polished axes suggests that they were bound in wooden staves and used for forest clearance.
Francis Pryor discusses a flint axe that he found north of Peterborough with fantastic swirling patterns that had been brought out by polishing – but this axe was totally impractical as the patterns were fault lines, making the flint very fragile. However, it must have been valued by its owner and/or maker, bearing in mind the work involved in making it. These facts suggest various interpretations of the purpose of the Langdale axes, which were both beautiful and practical, as well as being traded many miles from their place of production.
Context
The Langdale industry was one of many which extracted hard stone for manufacture into polished axes. The Neolithic period was a time of settlement on the land, and the development of farming on a large scale. Clearance of the forest cover was necessary in order to plant crops and rear animals, so axes were a staple tool, not just for clearance but also for wood working timber for houses, boats and other structures. Flint was probably the most widely used, simply because it was available from numerous flint mines in the downlands, such as Grimes Graves, Cissbury and Spiennes. Blades from roughing-out from flint and chert could also be used as small knives, arrowheads and other small sharp tools such as burins and awls.
But other hard and tough stones were used, such as igneous rocks from Penmaenmawr in North Wales, and similar working areas to Langdale have been found there. Many other locations for production of axes have been suggested (but not always found) across the country including Tievebulliagh in County Antrim, sites in Cornwall, Scotland and the Charnwood Forest in Leicestershire. It is also likely that bluestone axes were exported from the Preseli hills in Pembrokeshire. The industry was also widely developed elsewhere in the world, such as in Australia at Mount William stone axe quarry which used a similar rock until relatively recent times.
The variety of rocks used in polished tools and other artefacts is evident in museum collections, not all of the sources of the rocks having been positively identified. Taking sections is necessarily destructive of part of the artefact, and thus discouraged by many museums. Likewise, the rocks or anvils used to polish the axes are rare in Britain but common in France and Sweden.
Radiocarbon dating at the Langdale stone axe factory site suggests that it was in operation for about 1,000 years during the Neolithic period.
Current thinking links the manufacturers of the axes to some of the first Neolithic stone circles such as that at Castlerigg.
Conservation
The altitude and rough terrain of the archaeological sites have protected them from types of damage caused by human settlement in lowland areas. However, Great Langdale is much visited by walkers. People have removed axes (although current thinking is that they should be left in situ) and have caused inadvertent damage to stone scatters by walking.
An attempt to schedule the sites as ancient monuments in the 1980s was thwarted by the lack of reliable mapping. However, English Heritage has been considering questions on how the sites should be managed. Particular attention has been paid to the siting of footpaths to avoid damage to axeworking sites.
Since the 1990s eroded paths in the Lake District, including Great Langdale, have been repaired by a "Fix the Fells" project in which the National Trust is the major partner.
Langdale axes are displayed in Cumbria at Kendal Museum and Tullie House Museum and Art Gallery, Carlisle, and in other collections such as the British Museum.

Laponite is a synthetic smectite clay invented in 1962 by clay scientist Barbara Neumann. Usually produced as powder, laponite is a nanomaterial made up of very small disk-shaped crystals used in multiple industrial applications. Laponite was first marketed by the company Laporte plc and is currently produced by BYK Additives & Instruments. Laponite is not an approved mineral species, since it is not naturally occurring and it is not produced by geological processes.
In the first formulation of laponite created by Neumann in 1962, the synthetic clay was determined to be a fluorohectorite and was produced in the form of discs 1 nanometer thick and with a diameter of 60 to 80 nanometers. This went into mass production in 1964. The mineral structure of the clay gives laponite its particular physical characteristics and is similar to the smectite group of clay minerals, with a 2:1 layered crystal structure in which two tetrahedral silica sheets lie either side of an octahedral sheet containing magnesium ions. In 1966, Neumann patented a second formulation of laponite, called 'Laponite RD'. This form was free from fluorine, and has subsequently become the most widely used form of laponite. This form of laponite has an empirical formula of Na0.7[(Si8Mg5.5Li0.3)O20(OH)4]. In later years, Neumann also created other variants of laponite including a lithium-free magnesium silicate clay, a form of synthetic stevensite, and an iron silicate clay, which was a synthetic form of nontronite.

Larches are deciduous conifers in the genus Larix, of the family Pinaceae. Growing to as much as 60 m (195 ft) tall, they are native to the cooler regions of the Northern Hemisphere. They grow in lowland forests in the far north, and high in mountains further south. Larches are among the dominant plants in the boreal forests of Siberia and Canada, making them the most abundant genus of trees on earth. Larch wood is tough and relatively durable; it is used in boatbuilding, cladding, decking, garden furniture, fencing, and construction. Products extracted from larch include arabinogalactan (larch gum), rosin, turpentine, and an essential oil.
Etymology
The English name larch was recorded in 1548 by the botanist William Turner. It derives from the German Lärche, in turn from the Middle High German larche, which is conjectured to derive from an unrecorded Old High German name for the tree, *larihha. That derives from the Latin name of the tree, Larix. The Latin name probably was borrowed from a Gaulish language spoken in the Alps.
Description
Habit and foliage
The tallest species, Larix occidentalis, can reach 50 to 60 m (165 to 195 ft). Larch tree crowns are sparse, with the major branches horizontal and in whorls; the second and third order branchlets are roughly horizontal in some species, pendulous in others. Larch shoots are dimorphic, with needle-like leaves borne singly on long shoots with several buds, and in dense clusters of 20–50 needles on short shoots with only a single bud. Larch wood is resinous. The bark of young trees is smooth; that of older trees is thick and scaly. Larches are among the few deciduous conifers, which are usually evergreen.
Cones
The male (pollen) cones are small, on the ends of shoots that die after pollination. The female (seed) cones are small, typically erect, and take 4–7 months to reach maturity after pollination. The seed scales spread apart when mature, allowing the winged seeds, two per scale, to fall out. The leaflike bract scales can be either long and visible (exserted) or short and hidden between the seed scales.
The chromosome number is 2n = 24, similar to that of most of the other species of the family Pinaceae.
Distribution
The genus Larix is present in all the temperate-cold zones of the Northern Hemisphere, from North America to northern Siberia, passing through Europe, mountainous China and Japan. The larches are important forest trees of Russia, Central Europe, the United States and Canada. They require a cool and fairly humid climate, and for this reason, their distribution includes the mountains of the temperate zones, while in the northernmost boreal zones, they are also found in the plains. Larix grows further north than any other tree genus, in North America and Siberia reaching the tundra and polar ice. The larch species Larix gmelinii is the world's most northerly-growing tree, at 75° north in the Taymyr Peninsula.
The larches are pioneer species not very demanding of the soil and they are very long-lived trees. They live in pure or mixed forests together with other conifers or more rarely with broad-leaved trees. In 1965, larch constituted 40.2% of the forests of the Soviet Union and had a cumulative volume of 28,450 million m³, (28.45 cubic kilometres, or 6.8 cubic miles) of solid wood; by a wide margin, the most abundant genus of trees on earth.
Evolution
External phylogeny
The genus Larix belongs to the subfamily Laricoideae, which includes the Douglas firs, genus Pseudotsuga. The genus Cathaya was included in some older studies, but based on transcriptome analysis, is now considered closer to Pinus and Picea. The split of Larix from Pseudotsuga occurred about 45 million years ago.
Taxonomy and internal phylogeny
The genus Larix was described by the English botanist Philip Miller in 1754. In the 20th century, cone bract length was used to divide the larches into two sections (sect. Larix with short bracts, and sect. Multiserialis with long bracts), but genetic evidence does not support this division, indicating instead that the cone and bract size are merely adaptations to climatic conditions.
Late 20th century and early 21st century genetic studies proposed three groups within the genus, with a primary division into North American and Eurasian species, and a secondary division of the Eurasian into northern short-bracted species and southern long-bracted species; there was dispute over the position of Larix sibirica, a short-bracted species which is placed in the short-bracted group by some of the studies and the long-bracted group by others. Ten species and one natural hybrid of larch are accepted by Plants of the World Online (POWO), following the conservative treatment in Farjon (2010); several others are accepted by the Flora of China.
However, a 2025 study by Qiu and colleagues cast doubt on the species circumscriptions accepted by Farjon and the POWO; it showed that Larix himalaica is close to L. griffithii as geographic parsimony would predict (and not to L. potaninii as Farjon believed), and that L. speciosa is distinct and should be treated as a separate species. Conversely, they found that L. mastersiana was embedded within L. potaninii and may be best synonymised with it. Their results showed that the division between Old World and New World species as suggested by earlier studies is not correct, but rather, the primary divide is between the high-latitude circumboreal species, and the low latitude Sino-Himalayan species group, as shown in the cladogram.
Hybrids
Most larches can be hybridised in cultivation; these hybrids are not discussed by POWO as they are not of natural occurrence. Larix × marschlinsii Coaz (syn. L. × eurolepis), the Dunkeld larch, a hybrid of L. decidua × L. kaempferi, is by far the best known: it is of major importance in forestry in northern Europe. It arose more or less simultaneously in Switzerland and Scotland in 1901–1904. Other named hybrids include Larix × pendula (Sol.) Salisb. (L. decidua × L. laricina), and Larix × eurokurilensis Rohm. (L. decidua × L. gmelinii).
Ecology
Species interactions
Larches are associated with some mycorrhizal fungal species, including species which primarily or only associate with larch. One of the most prominent of these is the larch bolete Suillus grevillei. Larch is used as a food plant by the larvae of moths such as the larch pug, Eupithecia lariciata.
The large larch bark beetle, Ips cembrae, can be harmful to already-weakened larch trees, but is in general a less serious threat than a related species, the spruce bark beetle Ips typographus, is to spruces.
Diseases
Larches are prone to the fungal canker disease Lachnellula spp. (larch canker); this is a problem when late spring frosts cause minor injuries to the tree, allowing entry to the fungal spores. In Canada, this disease was first detected in 1980; it kills Larix laricina of any age.
Larches are vulnerable to Phytophthora ramorum. In 2013 the disease appeared in the Afan Forest Park in south Wales.
Laricifomes officinalis is another mushroom found in Europe, North America and northern Asia that causes internal wood rot. It is almost exclusive to the genus Larix. Other diseases are caused by mushrooms, fungal rusts, and bacteria.
Uses
Larch timber has many uses, including boatbuilding, exterior cladding, and interior panelling. Outdoor uses include fencing, gates, decking, garden furniture, and playground equipment. Since the heartwood is strong, durable, and available in large sizes, it is used for structures such as agricultural buildings. The Savill Building in Windsor Great Park has a timber roof shell made of many relatively thin laths, interlocking to provide strength. The wood is used, too, as fuel in industrial biomass energy plants. The bark used as a mulch in horticulture. Arabinogalactan, used in animal feed, cosmetics, and medicines, is extracted from heartwood. Larch trees can be tapped for liquid to be distilled into Venice turpentine. The tree yields rosin for violin bows and an essential oil used in aromatherapy. European Standard EN 350-2 lists larch as slightly to moderately durable.
Dunkeld larch is widely grown as its timber is durable and strong, and the tree tolerates poor weather better than non-hybrid larches.
In culture
The Roman architect Vitruvius conjectured in his De architectura that the Latin name for timber from the tree, larigna, came from the town of Larignum, where Julius Caesar, besieging the town, supposedly discovered the larch.
More recently, the Monty Python comedy troupe filmed a sketch with three schoolboys shown slides of the larch and asked which trees they were able to identify.

A lashing is an arrangement of rope, wire, or webbing with linking device used to secure and fasten two or more items together in a somewhat rigid manner. Lashings are most commonly applied to timber poles, and are commonly associated with cargo, containerization, the Scouting movement, sailors, and gardeners.
In its most basic sense, lashing is about attaching two poles (or spars) together. It consists of "wraps", winding the rope around the poles, and "fraps", winding the around between the poles and around the wraps to tighten them.
It has been imagined that the first lashing made by humans was wrapping a few strips of bark around a stone to hold it to a tree branch to make an ax to hunt and build with. In modern times, the same methods are used, but strips of bark and vines have been replaced with natural and synthetic fiber ropes. Scouts and campers use lashings to build camp gadgets and improve their campsites for comfort and convenience, including the building of rafts for transport and competitive events. Lashings are also used in pioneering, the art of creating structures such as bridges and towers, using ropes and wooden spars.
There are still areas in the world where lashing spars (or poles) is the basic means of building.
Types
Square lashing
Square lashing is a type of lashing used to bind spars together, at right angles to one another. There are different types, but all consist of a series of wraps around the spars, and frapping around the line running between the spars.
Diagonal lashing
Diagonal lashing is a type of lashing used to bind spars or poles together, to prevent racking. It gets its name from the fact that the wrapping turns cross the poles diagonally and is used to spring poles together where they do not touch as in the X-brace of a trestle.
Shear lashing
Shear lashing (two-spar shear lashing) also spelled "sheer lashing" is used for lashing together two parallel spars which will be opened out of the parallel to form sheer legs as in the formation of an A-frame. The clove hitch is tied around one leg only and frapping turns are taken between the poles.
Round lashing
The round lashing is most frequently used to join two poles together to extend their length. Typically, two lashings are used a reasonable distance apart for extra strength. In the simple version, a clove hitch is tied around both poles and there are no frapping turns.
The nautical term gammon means a round lashing of rope or iron hardware to attach a mast to a boat or ship.
Tripod lashing
The tripod lashing is used to join three spars together to form a self supporting structure. Two structures can be used to support a crossbar or platform. Other names are gyn lashing, figure of eight lashing, and three-spar shear lashing. If the lashing is tied around three spars, then the structure is called a tripod, but quadpods can also be made by using four spars.

Le Grand-Pressigny (French pronunciation: [lə ɡʁɑ̃ pʁesiɲi] ) is a commune in the Indre-et-Loire department in central France.
There is a Chalcolithic flint mine located in the commune. It produced an unusual caramel-coloured stone which appears to have been highly prized across Europe with examples found in the Pyrenees, the Netherlands and Switzerland. Blocks of flint and unfinished blanks were traded, as well as finished tools.
Population

Plants for the production of lead are generally referred to as lead smelters.
Primary lead production begins with sintering. Concentrated lead ore is fed into a sintering machine with iron, silica, limestone fluxes, coke, soda ash, pyrite, zinc, caustics or pollution control particulates. Smelting uses suitable reducing substances that will combine with those oxidizing elements to free the metal. Reduction is the final, high-temperature step in smelting. It is here that the oxide becomes the elemental metal. A reducing environment (often provided by carbon monoxide in an air-starved furnace) pulls the final oxygen atoms from the raw metal.
Lead is usually smelted in a blast furnace, using the lead sinter produced in the sintering process and coke to provide the heat source. As melting occurs, several layers form in the furnace. A combination of molten lead and slag sinks to the bottom of the furnace, with a layer of the lightest elements referred to as speiss, including arsenic and antimony floating to the top of the molten material. The crude bullion and lead slag layers flow out of the 'furnace front' and into the 'forehearth', where the two streams are separated. The lead slag stream, containing most of the 'fluxing' elements added to the sintering machine (predominantly silica, limestone, iron and zinc) can either be discarded or further processed to recover the contained zinc.
The crude lead bullion, containing significant quantities of copper will then undergo 'copper drossing'. In this step elemental sulphur, usually in solid form is added to the molten crude lead bullion to react with the contained copper. A "matte" layer forms in this step, containing most of the copper originating from the crude lead bullion and some other impurities as metal sulfides. The speiss and the matte are usually sold to copper smelters where they are refined for copper processing.
The lead from the blast furnace, called lead bullion, then undergoes the drossing process. The bullion is agitated in kettles then cooled to 700–800 degrees. This process results in molten lead and dross. Dross refers to the lead oxides, copper, antimony and other elements that float to the top of the lead. Dross is usually skimmed off and sent to a dross furnace to recover the non-lead components which are sold to other metal manufacturers. The Parkes process is used to separate silver or gold from lead.
Finally, the molten lead is refined. Pyrometallurgical methods are usually used to remove the remaining non-lead components of the mixture, for example the Betterton-Kroll process and the Betts electrolytic process. The non-lead metals are usually sold to other metal processing plants. The refined lead may be made into alloys or directly cast.
People who operate or work in such plants are also referred to as smelters or casters.
Lead ores
Galena, the most common mineral of lead, is primarily lead sulfide (PbS). The sulfide is oxidized to a sulfite (PbSO3) which thermally decomposes into lead oxide and sulfur dioxide gas. (PbO and SO2) The sulfur dioxide (like the carbon dioxide in the example above) is expelled, and the lead oxide is reduced.
Anglesite, Cerussite, Pyromorphite, Mimetite and Wulfenite are other lead ores.
Other elements frequently present with lead ores include zinc and silver.
Secondary lead processing
Most of the lead produced comes from secondary sources. Lead scrap includes lead-acid batteries, cable coverings, pipes, sheets and lead coated, or terne bearing, metals. Solder, product waste and dross may also be recovered for its small lead content. Most secondary lead is used in batteries.
To recover lead from a battery, the battery is broken and the components are classified. The lead containing components are processed in blast furnaces for hard lead or rotary reverberatory furnaces for fine particles. The blast furnace is similar in structure to a cupola furnace used in iron foundries. The furnace is charged with slag, scrap iron, limestone, coke, oxides, dross, and reverberatory slag. The coke is used to melt and reduce the lead. Limestone reacts with impurities and floats to the top. This process also keeps the lead from oxidizing. The molten lead flows from the blast furnace into holding pots. Lead may be mixed with alloys, including antimony, tin, arsenic, copper and nickel. It is then cast into ingots.
Lead exposure
Humans have been smelting lead for thousands of years, poisoning themselves in the process. Although lead poisoning is one of the oldest known work and environmental hazards, the modern understanding of the small amount of lead necessary to cause harm did not come about until the latter half of the 20th century. No safe threshold for lead exposure has been discovered—that is, there is no known amount of lead that is too small to cause the body harm.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization state that a blood lead level of 10 μg/dL or above is a cause for concern; however, lead may impair development and have harmful health effects even at lower levels, and there is no known safe exposure level. Authorities such as the American Academy of Pediatrics define lead poisoning as blood lead levels higher than 10 μg/dL.
Lead smelters with little pollution controls contribute to several environmental problems, especially raised blood lead levels in the surrounding population. The problem is particularly significant in many children who have grown up in the proximity to a lead smelter.
History
The earliest known cast lead beads were thought found in the Çatalhöyük site in Anatolia (Turkey), and dated from about 6500 BC. They were later identified in fact to be made from cerussite and galena, minerals rich in, but distinct from, lead. Ancient smelting was done using loads of lead ore and charcoal in outdoor hearths and furnaces.
Although lead is a common metal, its discovery had relatively little impact in the ancient world. It is too soft to be used for weapons (except possibly as sling projectiles) or for structural elements. However, being easy to cast and shape, it came to be extensively used in the classical world of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome for piping and storage of water. It was also used as a mortar in stone buildings, and as a writing material.
Smeltmills were water-powered mills used to smelt lead or other metals. The Roman lead smelting has led to evidence of global pollution. Greenland ice cores from 500 BC to 300 AD show measurably elevated lead content in the atmosphere. Researchers studying an ice core from Colle Gnifetti, in the Swiss part of the Monte Rosa massif, have found that higher historical European airborne lead pollution levels are associated with changes in the monetary system from gold to silver from the year 640 AD, with the principal source likely to be the Melle mines in France. Later airborne pollution, between the years 1170 and 1216, correlates even more strongly with contemporaneous records of lead and silver production from mines in the Peak District of England, at levels similar to those seen in the Industrial Revolution.
Georgius Agricola (1494–1555) presented details of lead smelting methods and facilities current in Europe in the first half of the 16th century in Book IX of his treatise on mining and metallurgy, De Re Metallica. Methods ranged from primitive open-hearth arrangements (essentially bonfires on which lead ore was piled) to blast furnaces capable of continuous operation.
In the US there are 400 forgotten lead smelting firms that operated in the 1930s to 1960s and may have deposited dangerous levels of lead contamination in nearby soil.
Historic mining and smelting sites
Asia
Gazimursky Zavod
Bupyeong silver mine
Australia
Boolaroo, New South Wales
Argenton, New South Wales
Cockle Creek Smelter
Europe
Grinton Smelt Mill, North Yorkshire, England
Milford, Derbyshire
Mendip Hills
Wirksworth
The tin and lead smelter in Arnhem, the Netherlands, was shut down in the 1990s.
Upper Harz, Germany
Copșa Mică works, Transylvania
Rammelsberg, Germany
Ballycorus Leadmines
Dalnegorsk
Eas Anie
Silberhütte (Harzgerode)
North America
Noonday Camp, California
Tri-State district (SE Kansas, SW Missouri, NE Oklahoma)
Southeast Missouri Lead District
Old Mines, Missouri
ASARCO Murray, Utah
Midvale, Utah
International Smelting and Refining Company Tooele, Utah
Silver City, Utah
Carondelet, St. Louis
Bunker Hill Mine and Smelting Complex, Idaho
Ketchum, Idaho
El Paso, Texas
Dewey-Humboldt, Arizona
Priest Mine, Canada
Cerro Gordo Mines
Butte, Montana
Harbor Island (Seattle)
Sinsinawa, Wisconsin
East Chicago, Indiana
South America
Active lead mines and smelters
Africa
Kitwe, Zambia
Australia
Nyrstar Port Pirie
Broken Hill, New South Wales
Mount Isa Mines
Asia
Chanderiya Smelter Complex in the Chittorgarh district of Rajasthan state of India
Europe
Rönnskär copper smelter is in Skelleftehamn, Sweden and its main products are copper, zinc clinker, lead and precious metals.
Bergsöe lead smelter outside Landskrona in southern Sweden extracts lead from scrap car batteries.
Tara Mine
KCM in Plovdiv which has produced lead for over 60 years using a blast furnace and is now in the process of bringing a new 60 million euro smelter TSL furnace online in order to replace the ageing blast furnace.
North America
Doe Run Resources Corporation is the largest integrated lead producer in North America and the largest primary lead producer in the western world.
Hayden Smelter, Arizona
Belledune, New Brunswick
Red Dog mine, Alaska
Teck Trail Operations, Trail, BC, Canada.
ECOBAT RESOURCES, NEW YORK, CALIFORNIA, INDIANA
South America
La Oroya
Cerro de Pasco, Peru

Lemnian Earth was a medicinal clay sourced from the Greek island of Lemnos in the Aegean Sea. It was used from antiquity on until the post-medieval period for the treatment of poisonings, open wounds and other illnesses. Lemnian clay was shaped into tablets with distinctive seals stamped into them, from which it got its name terra sigillata - Latin for 'sealed earth'.
History
Lemnian Earth was first documented in the 3rd century BCE for its use as a pigment. The earliest mention of its application as a medicine appears in Dioscorides' De Materia Medica, dated to ca. 50–70. Dioscorides describes how the earth is dug out of a cave, mixed with goat's blood and sealed with a goat seal, which shows the connection between the seal on the tablets and its medical use from the very beginning. He recommends Lemnian Earth as a treatment for open wounds, bites from venomous animals and suggest ingestion as an antidote to poisoning. Galen's De Simplicium Medicamentorum, dated to ca. 100-160, is an important source for the earth's extraction in antiquity as the author visited Lemnos and is able to give a detailed accounts as a first-hand witness. Other important sources from antiquity include Philostratus in Heroicus (ca. 170-240) and Pliny's Historia Naturalis (77-79) where he says:if rubbed under the eyes, it moderates pain and watering from the same, and prevents the flow from the lachrymal ducts. In cases of haemorrhage it should be administered with vinegar. It is used against complaints of the spleen and kidneys, copious menstruation, also against poisons, and wounds caused by serpents.References to Lemnian Earth in natural history texts are common until the 2nd century, after which they become increasingly rare, which potentially indicates a decline in its use. Lemnian Earth experiences a revival during the 14th century within the Ottoman Empire, when it became a widely traded medicine across Europe. From the 15th to 19th century, Lemnian Earth is mentioned throughout travel accounts. The French naturalist Pierre Belon took special interest in Lemnian Earth and after encountering it in Constantinople, he visted Lemnos in 1546 and describes the site and process of extraction in detail, although he did not witness it himself.
The raw material for Lemnian Earth was extracted from a site near Kotsinas, close to a spring known as Phthelidia. In antiquity, extraction of the raw clay was done by a priestess of Artemis, after which the material was transported to the nearby city of Hephaestia for further treatment. This included extensive washing of the clay, and the ritual sacrifice of grains to the Earth. In the medieval period, contemporary sources describe the extraction as taking place annually on August 6, from a designated pit near a stream.
Scientific Analysis
Modern research shows that Lemnian Earth is primarily composed of montmorillonite, kaolin, alum, and hematite. Some Lemnian Earth sphragides have been found to have antibacterial properties and ingestion may have positive effects on the gut microbiome, which could explain its historic therapeutic use.
Some researchers argue that water used for washing the natural clay in both the ancient and medieval process may have altered the composition of the clay. The spring water near the extraction site is naturally enriched with alum, which could have concentrated in the clay during washing and may have contributed to its medicinal properties. Additionally, the technique of levigation, where clay is mixed with water, heavier particles are allowed to settle, and lighter impurities are separated, may have helped to purify the clay and produce a finer, more uniform material. Therefore, the final medicinal product was produced from the raw clay through ritual processing, which might have significantly altered its composition and properties.

Letsoku is a clay-like soil used by several tribes in Southern Africa and other parts of the African continent.The Sotho-Tswana of Southern Africa have described a number of clay soils as letsoku. These are named differently by other tribes in the region, it is known as chomane in Shona, ilibovu in Swati, imbola in Xhosa and luvhundi in Venda, there are many other names given by other ethnic groups. Letsoku occurs naturally in a number of colours and it has many use, it is mostly used for cosmetic applications in Southern Africa. However, other functions of it is related to artwork, medicinal use, cultural symbolism and traditional beliefs
Letsoku nature and processing
Letsoku is a native earth coloured with hydrated iron oxide, it varies in colour from pale yellow to deep red, brown and from off-white to black, with some having a light grey colour. Letsoku occurs in two distinctive kinds; one has a clayey basis while the other is chalky earth. The former generally is richer and purer in colour than the other. both variations occur naturally in stratified rocks and rubble and rarely as extensive deposits. Letsoku can artificially be prepared through calcination and can be transformed into other colours like mars orange, violet and red.
Letsoku has been described as a substance that never solidifies or as a soft stone. The raw letsoku chunks are crushed with traditional pestle and mortar, it is also grinded on top of a stone with another stone called tshilo in Sotho-Tswana. Sieving is done thereafter to yield a fine powder. Some letsoku users heat the dry raw chunks in an empty pot to disintegrate it into fine powder.
Letsoku applications/uses
Cosmetics
In cosmetics, each colour is associated with a specific function. Yellow letsoku is used as a face powder to enhance complexion. Red is mixed with water and used as a mask and face wash. It is believed to remove pimples and blemishes, reddish pink and orange is used as a face powder just like the yellow one. White is for general body cleansing and hygiene, as it removes body and mouth odour. Maroon removes dark patches around the eyes( known as "ditshubaba" in Setswana). Purple/violet is for anti-aging, it is mixed with Vaseline and applied around the problem areas to eliminate wrinkles. The moisturizing properties of letsoku mixed with Vaseline is believed to have a sunscreen effect, women working outdoor on the farm apply it to protect the skin against harmful effects of the sun. The practice is believed to also make the skin soft and supple.
Application of letsoku is also believed to lighten the skin and remove any dark marks, or blemishes.The clay soil has been used as a pressed powder or foundation to produce a matte effect. Skin peeling has been known to be treated with a mixture of letsoku fine powder and makhura (butter) or petroleum jelly. Its application to hair has been known to promote hair growth.
Cultural symbolism
Letsoku in Southern Africa has been used to mark important stages of human life growth, like puberty, marriage and graduation from initiation schools in setswana known as bojale and bogwera. In some parts of Botswana, the ethnic groups still use letsoku to cover bodies of the initiates.Their caretakers help shave their heads and cover their bodies with red or maroon. It is believed that letsoku keeps initiates warm at the circumcision school. The girls are covered enough to ward off winter colds. In the past young girls used to wear fringed skirts (makgabe) with letsoku used to cover each stand of the fringe skirt.The Basotho have a leather apron called semola which is made for young women when they are received from the initiation school. The apron is decorated with red letsoku, which signifies womanhood. Other traditional celebrations like welcoming the bride into a new family are marked by the application of letsoku. In the culture of the San people, during the girls' puberty rituals, a young girl is isolated in her hut at her first menstruation. The women of the tribe perform a dance of the Eland Bull where they imitate the mating behaviour of eland cows, the girl is said to be suffering from the 'eland illness', in her seclusion she is ritually painted with red letsoku, wood ash and charcoal, all mixed with animal fat and plant pigments. As part of the marriage ritual a man gives the fat from the eland's heart to the parents of the girl, at a later stage the girl is anointed with the fat mixed with red letsoku as a way to mark her as a married woman.
The Namibian Himba women are known for the red letsoku that they apply on their whole bodies as a symbol of womanhood, the red letsoku is only applied by married women and young woman who just started their menstruation. They are constantly adorned with red ochre/letsoku made into a paste of a mixture of butter, fat, and red letsoku, known as otjize. The paste is applied to skin and hair.
Medicinal applications
In addition to symbolic uses, there is some evidence that letsoku had practical functions, for instance letsoku has been shown to have medicinal purposes as an antibacterial agent. It is also used for the treatment of chicken pox, protection against lighting and witchcraft, luck and ritual cleansing. In chicken pox treatment, an aqueous mixture of letsoku is used in a manner similar to calamine lotion. Burns may also be healed by applying the dry powder directly to the blisters allowing contact until it has dried up, it is also used to treat wounds, ulcers and rashes. Similarly the Australian Aboriginal people use ochre/letsoku to treat wounds and sores by covering a wound with chewed red ochre and then with leaves. Aqueous ochre is used in any sores on any part of the body and even for internal body pains;here the patient is covered in ochre and placed in the midday sun to provoke sweating thereby healing the person. Excessive menopausal bleeding was believed to be remedied or managed by the application of letsoku. An aqueous mixture of red and lighter yellow coloured letsoku is prepared and ingested orally,pregnant women who experience pica (abnormal food cravings) may be relieved by oral ingestion of letsoku.
Traditional beliefs
Crops in the field are believed to be protected using letsoku, some farmers mix their seeds with the red or maroon letsoku in the ritual in Sotho-Tswana community known as "go gotlha dipeo"(to rub the seeds). This is meant to protect the seeds, chase away evil spirits and keep hailstorms from damaging the plants. Farmers rub seeds scrupulously, using both hands, before planting as a form of nurturing the fields in advance. Crops are treated just like infants going through stages of being born, treating the umbilical cord, shaving and smearing the head for protection, others believe use of letsoku links the new born with ancestors. It is also believed that application of letsoku repels dangerous elements such as snakes and lions, and thereby acts as camouflage for the hunters in the forest.
Artwork
Potters use letsoku to enhance the colour of the finished pot. During the final stage of polishing a pot with a fine stone, letsoku is added for adornment. As an antibacterial agent, it has been shown that letsoku inhibits collagenase, making it ideal for tanning, softening and colouring leather. Sotho-Tswana tanners use either motsitsima (a herb) or letsoku as a pigment to paint leather skins a bright red colour, especially skin that is used for clothing and shoes. The San of Southern Africa have also used letsoku in the rock paintings found in Kwa-zulu Natal, Eastern and Western Cape provinces (South Africa) and Tsodilo hills in Botswana. They mainly used red, ranging from orange to brown, white, black and yellow in their paintings. The red and yellow colours were derived from letsoku, the blood of an Eland, an animal of great religious and symbolic significance, was mixed with letsoku to make pigmentation for the art paintings. Basotho have the mural tradition called Litema, which refers to four mural techniques; engraved patterns, created by drawing into wet plaster. Painted designs formally consisted of natural ochres (letsoku) and pigments.

Liberation thinning a process in silviculture for a number of important forestry operations. Liberation thinning is a process mostly used for logging operations but is also used for conservation, reforesting efforts, and fuel reduction or hazard fuel reduction. Usually for logging operations use liberation cutting first then liberation thinning will continue for another 20 – 30 years where every 10 years thinning is conducted. But the research with liberation thinning was used for young secondary forest around 4.5 years old to see the effects with DBH on younger tree where competition is the most prevalent.
Logging Operations
Liberation thinning is used to reduce competition between trees grown for harvesting to increase the DBH of young, juvenile, and mature trees, logging operations will choose the best tree for harvest comparing height, straightness of trunk, live canopy, disease, and DBH, to predict the growth outcome and reduce competition for cultural benefits like water and sunlight. This was done in Northern Costa Rica where protected forest and Agriculture land are tightly packed together limiting land for logging operations.
Conservation/reforesting efforts
Conservation is another way liberation thinning is helping our environment as reforestation in tropical areas struggle to achieve success due to the number of canopy layers needed. Conservation research used liberation thinning as a way to grow the best emergent layer, canopy layer, understory layer and finally forest floor.

A lime kiln is a kiln used for the calcination of limestone (calcium carbonate) to produce the form of lime called quicklime (calcium oxide). The chemical equation for this reaction is: CaCO3 + heat → CaO + CO2
This reaction can take place at anywhere above 840 °C (1,540 °F), but is generally considered to occur at 900 °C (1,650 °F) (at which temperature the partial pressure of CO2 is 1 atmosphere), but a temperature around 1,000 °C (1,830 °F) (at which temperature the partial pressure of CO2 is 3.8 atmospheres) is usually used to make the reaction proceed quickly. Excessive temperature is avoided because it produces unreactive, "dead-burned" lime.
Slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) can be formed by mixing quicklime with water.
History
Pre-pottery Neolithic
In plaster, proto-pottery, and mortar
Because it is so readily made by heating limestone, lime must have been known from the earliest times, and all the early civilizations used it in building mortars and as a stabilizer in mud renders and floors. According to finds at 'Ain Ghazal in Jordan, Yiftahel in Israel, and Abu Hureyra in Syria dating to 7500–6000 BC, the earliest use of lime was mostly as a binder on floors and in plaster for coating walls. This use of plaster may in turn have led to the development of proto-pottery, made from lime and ash. In mortar, the oldest binder was mud. According to finds at Catal Hüyük in Turkey, mud was soon followed by clay, and then by lime in the 6th millennium BC.
Lime use in agriculture and coal
Knowledge of its value in agriculture is also ancient, but agricultural use only became widely possible when the use of coal made it cheap in the coalfields in the late 13th century, and an account of agricultural use was given in 1523. The earliest descriptions of lime kilns differ little from those used for small-scale manufacture a century ago. Because land transportation of minerals like limestone and coal was difficult in the pre-industrial era, they were distributed by sea, and lime was most often manufactured at small coastal ports. Many preserved kilns are still to be seen on quaysides around the coasts of Britain.
Types of kilns
Permanent lime kilns fall into two broad categories: "flare kilns" also known as "intermittent" or "periodic" kilns; and "draw kilns" also known as "perpetual" or "running" kilns. In a flare kiln, a bottom layer of coal was built up and the kiln above filled solely with chalk. The fire was alight for several days, and then the entire kiln was emptied of the lime.
In a draw kiln, usually a stone structure, the chalk or limestone was layered with wood, coal or coke and lit. As it burnt through, lime was extracted from the bottom of the kiln, through the draw hole. Further layers of stone and fuel were added to the top.
Early kilns
The common feature of early kilns was an egg-cup shaped burning chamber, with an air inlet at the base (the "eye"), constructed of brick. Limestone was crushed (often by hand) to fairly uniform 20–60 mm (1–2+1⁄2 in) lumps – fine stone was rejected. Successive dome-shaped layers of limestone and wood or coal were built up in the kiln on grate bars across the eye. When loading was complete, the kiln was kindled at the bottom, and the fire gradually spread upwards through the charge. When burnt through, the lime was cooled and raked out through the base. Fine ash dropped out and was rejected with the "riddlings".
Only lump stone could be used, because the charge needed to "breathe" during firing. This also limited the size of kilns and explains why kilns were all much the same size. Above a certain diameter, the half-burned charge would be likely to collapse under its own weight, extinguishing the fire. So kilns always made 25–30 tonnes of lime in a batch. Typically the kiln took a day to load, three days to fire, two days to cool and a day to unload, so a one-week turnaround was normal. The degree of burning was controlled by trial and error from batch to batch by varying the amount of fuel used. Because there were large temperature differences between the center of the charge and the material close to the wall, a mixture of underburned (i.e. high loss on ignition), well-burned and dead-burned lime was normally produced. Typical fuel efficiency was low, with 0.5 tonnes or more of coal being used per tonne of finished lime (15 MJ/kg).
Industrial scale production
Lime production was sometimes carried out on an industrial scale. One example at Annery in North Devon, England, near Great Torrington, was made up of three kilns grouped together in an 'L' shape and was situated beside the Torrington canal and the River Torridge to bring in the limestone and coal, and to transport away the calcined lime in the days before properly metalled roads existed.
Sets of seven kilns were common. A loading gang and an unloading gang would work the kilns in rotation through the week.
A rarely used kiln was known as a "lazy kiln".
Australia
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries the town of Waratah in Gippsland, Victoria, Australia produced a majority of the quicklime used in the city of Melbourne as well as around other parts of Gippsland. The town, now called Walkerville, was set on an isolated part of the Victorian coastline and exported the lime by ship. When this became unprofitable in 1926 the kilns were shut down. The present-day area, though having no town amenities as such, markets itself as a tourist destination. The ruins of the lime kilns can still be seen today.
A lime kiln also existed in Wool Bay, South Australia.
Ukraine
United Kingdom
The large kiln at Crindledykes near Haydon Bridge, Northumbria, was one of more than 300 in the county. It was unique to the area in having four draw arches to a single pot. As production was cut back, the two side arches were blocked up, but were restored in 1989 by English Heritage.
The development of the national rail network made the local small-scale kilns increasingly unprofitable, and they gradually died out through the 19th century. They were replaced by larger industrial plants. At the same time, new uses for lime in the chemical, steel and sugar industries led to large-scale plants. These also saw the development of more efficient kilns.
A lime kiln erected at Dudley, West Midlands (formerly Worcestershire) in 1842 survives as part of the Black Country Living Museum which opened in 1976, although the kilns were last used during the 1920s. It is now among the last in a region which was dominated by coalmining and limestone mining for generations until the 1960s.
Other countries
Modern kilns
Shaft kilns
The theoretical heat (the standard enthalpy) of reaction required to make high-calcium lime is around 3.15 MJ per kg of lime, so the batch kilns were only around 20% efficient. The key to development in efficiency was the invention of continuous kilns, avoiding the wasteful heat-up and cool-down cycles of the batch kilns. The first were simple shaft kilns, similar in construction to blast furnaces. These are counter-current shaft kilns. Modern variants include regenerative and annular kilns. Output is usually in the range 100–500 tonnes per day.
Counter-current shaft kilns
The fuel is injected part-way up the shaft, producing maximum temperature at this point. The fresh feed fed in at the top is first dried then heated to 800 °C, where de-carbonation begins, and proceeds progressively faster as the temperature rises. Below the burner, the hot lime transfers heat to, and is cooled by, the combustion air. A mechanical grate withdraws the lime at the bottom. A fan draws the gases through the kiln, and the level in the kiln is kept constant by adding feed through an airlock. As with batch kilns, only large, graded stone can be used, in order to ensure uniform gas-flows through the charge. The degree of burning can be adjusted by changing the rate of withdrawal of lime. Heat consumption as low as 4 MJ/kg is possible, but 4.5 to 5 MJ/kg is more typical. Due to temperature peak at the burners up to 1200 °C in a shaft kiln conditions are ideal to produce medium and hard burned lime.
Regenerative kilns
These typically consist of a pair of shafts, operated alternately. First, when shaft A is the "primary" and B the "secondary" shaft, the combustion air is added from the top of shaft A, while fuel somewhat below via burner lances. The flame is top-bottom. The hot gases pass downward, cross to shaft B via the so-called "channel" and pass upward to exhaust of shaft B. At same time in both shafts cooling air is added from the bottom to cool the lime and to make exhaust of gases via the bottom of the kiln impossible via maintaining a positive pressure. The combustion air and cooling air leave the kiln jointly via exhaust on top of shaft B, preheating the stone. The direction of flow is reversed periodically (typically 5–10 times per hour) shaft A and B changing the role of "primary" and "secondary" shaft. The kiln has three zones: preheating zone on the top, burning zone in the middle, and cooling zone close to the bottom. The cycling produces a long burning zone of constant, relatively low temperature (around 950 °C) that is ideal for the production of high quality soft burned reactive lime. With exhaust gas temperatures as low as 120 °C and lime temperature at kiln outlet in 80 °C range the heat loss of the regenerative kiln is minimal, fuel consumption is as low as 3.6 MJ/kg. Due to these features the regenerative kilns are today mainstream technology under conditions of substantial fuel costs. Regenerative kilns are built with 150 to 800 t/day output, 300 to 450 being typical.
Annular kilns
These contain a concentric internal cylinder. This gathers pre-heated air from the cooling zone, which is then used to pressurize the middle annular zone of the kiln. Air spreading outward from the pressurized zone causes counter-current flow upwards, and co-current flow downwards. This again produces a long, relatively cool calcining zone. Fuel consumption is in 4 to 4.5 MJ/kg range and the lime is typically medium burned.
Rotary kilns
Rotary kilns started to be used for lime manufacture at the start of the 20th century and now account for a large proportion of new installations if energy costs are less important. The early use of simple rotary kilns had the advantages that a much wider range of limestone size could be used, from fines upwards, and undesirable elements such as sulfur can be removed. On the other hand, fuel consumption was relatively high because of poor heat exchange compared with shaft kilns, leading to excessive heat loss in exhaust gases. Old fashioned "long" rotary kilns operate at 7 to 10 MJ/kg. Modern installations partially overcome this disadvantage by adding a preheater, which has the same good solids/gas contact as a shaft kiln, but fuel consumption is still somewhat higher, typically in range of 4.5 to 6 MJ/kg. In the design shown, a circle of shafts (typically 8–15) is arranged around the kiln riser duct. Hot limestone is discharged from the shafts in sequence, by the action of a hydraulic "pusher plate". Kilns of 1000 tonnes per day output are typical. The rotary kiln is the most flexible of any lime kilns able to produce soft, medium, or hard burned as well as dead-burned lime or dolime.
Gas cleaning
All the above kiln designs produce exhaust gas that carries an appreciable amount of dust. Lime dust is particularly corrosive. Equipment is installed to trap this dust, typically in the form of electrostatic precipitators or bag filters. The dust usually contains a high concentration of elements such as alkali metals, halogens and sulfur.
Carbon dioxide emissions
The lime industry is a significant carbon dioxide emitter. The manufacture of one tonne of calcium oxide involves decomposing calcium carbonate, with the formation of 785 kg of CO2 in some applications, such as when used as mortar; this CO2 is later re-absorbed as the mortar goes off.
If the heat supplied to form the lime (3.75 MJ/kg in an efficient kiln) is obtained by burning fossil fuel it will release CO2: in the case of coal fuel 295 kg/t; in the case of natural gas fuel 206 kg/t. The electric power consumption of an efficient plant is around 20 kWh per tonne of lime. This additional input is the equivalent of around 20 kg CO2 per ton if the electricity is coal-generated. Thus, total emission may be around 1 tonne of CO2 for every tonne of lime even in efficient industrial plants, but is typically 1.3 t/t. However, if the source of heat energy used in its manufacture is a fully renewable power source, such as solar, wind, hydro or even nuclear; there may be no net emission of CO2 from the calcination process. Less energy is required in production per weight than portland cement, primarily because a lower temperature is required.

Limonite () is an iron ore consisting of a mixture of hydrated iron(III) oxide-hydroxides in varying composition. The generic formula is frequently written as FeO(OH)·nH2O, although this is not entirely accurate as the ratio of oxide to hydroxide can vary quite widely. Limonite is one of the three principal iron ores, the others being hematite and magnetite, and has been mined for the production of iron since at least 400 BC.
Names
Limonite is named for the Ancient Greek word λειμών (leimṓn [leː.mɔ̌ːn]), meaning "wet meadow", or λίμνη (límnē [lím.nɛː]), meaning "marshy lake", as an allusion to its occurrence as bog iron ore in meadows and marshes. In its brown form, it is sometimes called brown hematite or brown iron ore.
Characteristics
Limonite is relatively dense with a specific gravity varying from 2.7 to 4.3. It is usually medium to dark yellowish brown in color. The streak of limonite on an unglazed porcelain plate is always yellowish brown, a character which distinguishes it from hematite with a red streak, or from magnetite with a black streak. The hardness is quite variable, ranging from 1 to 5. In thin section it appears as red, yellow, or brown and has a high index of refraction, 2.0–2.4. Limonite minerals are strongly birefringent, but grain sizes are usually too small for this to be detectable.
Although originally defined as a single mineral, limonite is now recognized as a field term for a mixture of related hydrated iron oxide minerals, among them goethite, lepidocrocite, akaganeite, and jarosite. Determination of the precise mineral composition is practical only with X-ray diffraction techniques. Individual minerals in limonite may form crystals, but limonite does not, although specimens may show a fibrous or microcrystalline structure, and limonite often occurs in concretionary forms or in compact and earthy masses; sometimes mammillary, botryoidal, reniform or stalactitic. Because of its amorphous nature, and occurrence in hydrated areas limonite often presents as a clay or mudstone. However, there are limonite pseudomorphs after other minerals such as pyrite. This means that chemical weathering transforms the crystals of pyrite into limonite by hydrating the molecules, but the external shape of the pyrite crystal remains. Limonite pseudomorphs have also been formed from other iron oxides, hematite and magnetite; from the carbonate siderite and from iron rich silicates such as almandine garnets.
Formation
Limonite usually forms from the hydration of hematite and magnetite, from the oxidation and hydration of iron rich sulfide minerals, and chemical weathering of other iron rich minerals such as olivine, pyroxene, amphibole, and biotite. It is often the major iron component in lateritic soils, and limonite laterite ores are a source of nickel and potentially cobalt and other valuable metals, present as trace elements. It is often deposited in run-off streams from mining operations.
Uses
Nickel-rich limonite ores represent the largest reserves of nickel. Such minerals are classified as lateritic nickel ore deposits.
One of the first uses was as a pigment. The yellow form produced yellow ochre for which Cyprus was famous, while the darker forms produced more earthy tones. Roasting the limonite changed it partially to hematite, producing red ochres, burnt umbers and siennas. Bog iron ore and limonite mudstones are mined as a source of iron.
Iron caps or gossans of siliceous iron oxide typically form as the result of intensive oxidation of sulfide ore deposits. These gossans were used by prospectors as guides to buried ore.
Limonite was mined for its ancillary gold content. The oxidation of sulfide deposits which contained gold, often resulted in the concentration of gold in the iron oxide and quartz of the gossans. The gold of the primary veins was concentrated into the limonites of the deeply weathered rocks. In another example the deeply weathered iron formations of Brazil served to concentrate gold with the limonite of the resulting soils.
History
Limonite was one of the earliest materials used as a pigment by humans, and can be seen in Neolithic cave paintings and pictographs.
While the first iron ore was likely meteoric iron, and hematite was far easier to smelt, in Africa, where the first evidence of iron metallurgy occurs, limonite is the most prevalent iron ore. Before smelting, as the ore was heated and the water driven off, more and more of the limonite was converted to hematite. The ore was then pounded as it was heated above 1250 °C, at which temperature the metallic iron begins sticking together and non-metallic impurities are thrown off as sparks. Complex systems developed, notably in Tanzania, to process limonite. Nonetheless, hematite and magnetite remained the ores of choice when smelting was by bloomeries, and it was only with the development of blast furnaces in the 1st century BCE in China and about 1150 CE in Europe, that the brown iron ore of limonite could be used to best advantage.
Bog iron ore and limonite were mined in the US, but this ended with the development of advanced mining techniques.
Goldbearing limonite gossans were productively mined in the Shasta County, California, mining district. Similar deposits were mined near Rio Tinto in Spain and Mount Morgan in Australia. In the Dahlonega gold belt in Lumpkin County, Georgia, gold was mined from limonite-rich lateritic or saprolite soil.
As saprolite deposits have been exhausted in many mining sites, limonite has become the most prominent source of nickel for use in energy dense batteries.

"Live by the sword, die by the sword" is a proverb in the form of a parallel phrase, derived from the Gospel of Matthew (Matthew 26, 26:52): "Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword."
Original biblical quotation
The phrase comes from Matthew 26:52, in which one of Jesus's disciples is described as having struck the servant of the High Priest of Israel and cut off his ear. Jesus is described as having rebuked him, saying:
The saying "all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword" is only found in the Gospel of Matthew and not in any of the other gospels. The Latin version refers to the weapon as a gladius, while the Greek version refers to it as a makhaira.
Interpretations
Early Christian theologians were almost universally pacifists, with Justin Martyr, Hippolytus of Rome, Tertullian, and Origen all making strong statements against soldiering and bearing weapons.
According to St. John Chrysostom, when Jesus rebuked the unnamed disciple, it was a lesson that: "The disciples might accept meekly whatever befell him when they had learned that this also is occurring according to God’s will." Thus, contrary to the common proverbial understanding, St. John Chrysostom explains where there is God's will (not the will of men) there is no need to react in passion.
The saying is sometimes interpreted to mean "those who live by violence will die by violence", which some have interpreted as a call for Christian pacifism.
History
A very similar line can be found in the Agamemnon, the first play of the Oresteia trilogy by the ancient Greek tragedian and playwright Aeschylus. The line, spoken by Queen Clytemnestra of Mycenae after she murders her husband King Agamemnon in an act of vengeance, is rendered in the original Greek and translated to English (with varying levels of similarity to the original) as:
The line differs across translators and is variously understood as "an eye for an eye", emphasizing the irony or appropriateness of the means by which he was killed. The play, first performed in 458 BCE, remains popular to this day with regular performances and readings.
References in popular culture
In the song "Night Moves" (1976) by Bob Seger, the singer mentions "Living by the Sword" in the third verse.
In the song "Die by the Sword" by thrash metal band Slayer on their debut album Show No Mercy (1983), referenced in its title and in lyrics.
In the song "Five Magics" by Megadeth on their 1990 album Rust in Peace, Mustaine uses the phrase "He who lives by the sword, will surely also die" referencing this quote.
In the second verse of Geto Boys' song Mind Playing Tricks on Me (1991), the idiom is used to describe the violent life the protagonist leads.
Heavy metal band Saxon, included the song "To Live by the Sword" in their 2004 album Lionheart. The chorus goes: To live by the sword you must die by the sword.
Heavy metal band Judas Priest, included the song "Sword of Damocles" in their 2014 album Redeemer of Souls. Its chorus goes: Truth will find its reward If you live and die by the sword.
Heavy metal band Accept, included the song "Die by the Sword" in their 2017 album The Rise of Chaos. Its chorus reproduces the whole proverb: If you live by the sword, you will die by the sword.
The song “Live By The Sword”, from hyperpop artist Dorian Electra's 2019 studio album, Flamboyant, is both named after the saying, and uses the saying in its hook.
Jake Hill's song "By The Sword", released in 2020, references the phrase in its title and lyrics.
The saying is paraphrased in the slogan "live by the bomb, die by the bomb" used in the White House Peace Vigil protest.

Location awareness refers to devices that can determine their location. Navigational instruments provide location coordinates for vessels and vehicles. Surveying equipment identifies location with respect to a well-known location wireless communications device.
The term applies to navigating, real-time locating, and positioning support with global, regional or local scope. The term has been applied to traffic, logistics, business administration, and leisure applications. Location awareness is supported by navigation systems, positioning systems, and/or locating services.
Location awareness without the active participation of the device is known as non-cooperative locating or detection.
History of terminology
The term originated for configurations settings of network systems, and addressed network entities. Network location awareness (NLA) services collect network configuration and location information, and notify applications when this information changes. With the advent of global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) and radio-equipped mobile devices, the term was redefined to include consumer-focused applications.
While location awareness began as a matter of static user location, the notion was extended to reflect movement. Context models have been proposed to support context-aware applications which use location to tailor interfaces, refine application-relevant data, increase the precision of information retrieval, discover services, make user interaction implicit and build smart environments. For example, a location-aware mobile phone may confirm that it is currently in a building.
Determining location
Description in logical terms uses a structured textual form. International standardisation offers a common method using ISO/TS 16952 as originated with German standards DIN EN 61346 and DIN EN 81346.
Location in mathematical terms offers coordinates that refer to a nominated point of reference.
Location in network terms relates to locating network nodes. These include:
ITU switched line access addressing according to International Telecommunication Union Q-Series standards, Telecommunications Signalling System No. 7 (SS7) and mirroring ANSI Standards T1.110—General Information and subsequent standards.
IEEE media access addressing according to MAC International standard ISO/IEC 10038 with ISO/IEC 11802 and ANSI/IEEE edition.
ISO procedure call addressing according to URN/UUID International standards ISO/IEC 11578 and ISO/IEC 9834 and IETF RFC 4122.
Variants
"Crisp" locating offers precise coordinates, using wireless signals or optical sighting, possibly with phase angle measurements. Coordinates are relative to either a standardized system of coordinates, e.g., WGS84, or a fixed object such as a building plan. Real-time locating adds timely delivery of results, especially for moving targets. Real time locating is defined with ISO/IEC 19762-5 and ISO/IEC 24730-1. Fuzzy locating offers less precision, e.g., presence "near" a point of reference. Measuring wireless power levels can supply this degree of precision. Less sophisticated systems can use wireless distance measurements to estimate a point of reference in polar coordinates (distance and direction) from another site. Index locating indicates presence at a known location, as with fixed RFID reader's and RFID tags.
Applications
Location-aware systems address the acquisition of coordinates in a grid (for example using distance metrics and lateration algorithms) or at least distances to reference points (for example discriminating presence at a certain choke point on a corridor or in a room of a building).
Navigation
Navigation and reckoning are key concerns for seafarers, aviators and professional drivers. The task is to dynamically determine the current location and the time, distance and direction to destination. radar served for regional demand and NAVSTAR satellite systems for global demand. Global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) have become ubiquitous in long-haul transport operation and are becoming a standard automobile feature.
Surveying
Surveying is the static complement to navigating. It is essential for delineating land ownership and for architects and civil engineers designing construction projects. Optical surveying technology preceded laser triangulating aids.
Business process
Currently location awareness is applied to design innovative process controls, and is integral to ubiquitous and wearable computing. On mobile devices, location aware search can prioritize results that are close to the device. Conversely, the device location can be disclosed to others, at some cost to the bearer's privacy.
Warehouse and routing
RFID provides a time/location reference for an object, but does not indicate that the object remains at that location, which is sufficient for applications that limit access, such as tracking objects entering and leaving a warehouse, or for objects moving on a fixed route, such as charging tolls for crossing a bridge.
Consumer
Location awareness enables new applications for ubiquitous computing systems and mobile phones. Such applications include the automatic reconfiguration of a computing device to suit the location in which it is currently being used (examples include ControlPlane Archived 2017-11-07 at the Wayback Machine and Locamatic), or publishing a user's location to appropriate members of a social network, and allowing retailers to publish special offers to potential customers who are near to the retailers. Allegedly, individuals gain self confidence with confirmation of current whereabouts.
Infrastructure
While governments have created global systems for computing locations, independent localized systems exist at scales ranging from one building to sub-national regions.
Local
Such solutions may apply concepts of real-time locating system (RTLS) and wireless personal area network (WPAN), wireless LAN or DECT, with results in proprietary terms of floor plans or room numbers. Local systems degrade as distance from the locality increases. Applications include the automatic reconfiguration of a computing device to suit the location in which it is currently being used.
Regional
This approach uses for example mobile phone systems, such as 3GPP, GSM or LTE, typically returning information in standardized coordinates as with WGS84 in standardized formats such as National Marine Electronics Association (NMEA) for outdoor usage or in symbolic coordinates referring to street addresses.
Global
This approach relies on global navigation satellite system (GNSS) technology generally adopting WGS84 and NMEA. Applications include avalanche rescue or emergency and mountain rescue as well as UAVs which are commonly used in search and rescue, (SAR) and combat search and rescue (CSAR).
Network location awareness
Network location awareness (NLA) describes the location of a node in a network.

The Los Angeles abrasion test (LA abrasion) is the North American standard for testing toughness (resistance to abrasion and degradation) of construction aggregate or gravel and its suitability for road construction. Test methodology and equipment is defined in the ASTM International publications ASTM C131 for particle sizes smaller than 37 mm (1.5 inches) and ASTM C535 for sizes larger than 19 mm (3/4 of an inch); the overlapping range of 19 to 37 mm can be tested by either of two standards.
The Los Angeles machine defined in the standard is a simple ball mill of specified size and shape The standard charge of rock is set at 2.5–5 kilograms (5.5–11.0 lb) depending on the size of the particles. The drum of the mill has a single shelf plate that scoops test samples and steel balls from the bottom, lifts them up and then drops them, creating a crushing impact. The interaction of the drum, steel balls and the samples at the bottom of the drum causes further abrading and grinding. The complete test requires 500 drum revolutions at a speed of 30–33 revolutions per minute. Crushed sample is then separated from fine dust on a sieve, washed, dried and weighed. The test reports loss of mass to abrasion and impact, expressed as a percentage of initial sample mass. Maximum acceptable loss for the base course of the road is 45%; the more demanding surface course must be 35% or less.
The test was developed by the city engineers of Los Angeles in the 1920s. The California Highway Commission found the new methodology superior to the established Deval abrasion test, and adopted the LA test in 1927. In the 1930s, national studies demonstrated the Deval test did not correlate with the service record of sampled rock altogether, while an LA loss rating of less than 40% was a reliable indicator of quality. The federal standard for LA abrasion testing was formally adopted by the ASTM in 1937. Decades later, field studies found that the LA test results do not always correlate with reality, thus engineers outside of the United States developed different national standards like the French wet micro-Deval procedure or the British Standard 812.
Citations

Lumber, also called timber or fine wood in the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand, is wood that has been processed into uniform and useful sizes (dimensional lumber), including beams and planks or boards. Lumber is mainly used for construction framing, as well as finishing (floors, wall panels, window frames). Lumber has many uses beyond home building. In some parts of the world, including the United States and Canada, the term timber refers specifically to unprocessed wood fiber, such as cut logs or standing trees that have yet to be cut.
Lumber may be supplied either rough-sawn, or surfaced on one or more of its faces. Rough lumber is the raw material for furniture-making, and manufacture of other items requiring cutting and shaping. It is available in many species, including hardwoods and softwoods, such as white pine and red pine, because of their low cost.
Finished lumber is supplied in standard sizes, mostly for the construction industry – primarily softwood, from coniferous species, including pine, fir and spruce (collectively spruce-pine-fir), cedar, and hemlock, but also some hardwood, for high-grade flooring. It is more commonly made from softwood than hardwoods, and 80% of lumber comes from softwood.
Terminology
In the United States and Canada, milled boards are called lumber, while timber describes standing or felled trees.
In contrast, in Britain, and some other Commonwealth nations and Ireland, the term timber is used in both senses. (In the UK, the word lumber is rarely used in relation to wood and has several other meanings.)
Re-manufactured lumber
Re-manufactured lumber is the result of secondary or tertiary processing of previously milled lumber. Specifically, it refers to lumber cut for industrial or wood-packaging use. Lumber is cut by ripsaw or resaw to create dimensions that are not usually processed by a primary sawmill.
Re-sawing is the splitting of 1-to-12-inch (25–305 mm) hardwood or softwood lumber into two or more thinner pieces of full-length boards. For example, splitting a 10-foot-long (3.0 m) 2×4 (1+1⁄2 by 3+1⁄2 in or 38 by 89 mm) into two 2×2s (1+1⁄2 by 1+1⁄2 in or 38 by 38 mm) of the same length is considered re-sawing.
Plastic lumber
Structural lumber may also be produced from recycled plastic and new plastic stock. Its introduction has been strongly opposed by the forestry industry. Blending fiberglass in plastic lumber enhances its strength, durability, and fire resistance. Plastic fiberglass structural lumber can have a "class 1 flame spread rating of 25 or less, when tested in accordance with ASTM standard E 84," which means it burns more slowly than almost all treated wood lumber.
Timber mark
A timber mark is a code beaten on to cut wood by a specially made hammer to show the logging licence.
History
The definition of the word lumber as sawn planks of wood originated in the 17th century in North America.
In 1420, the archipelago of Madeira was colonized by the Portuguese Empire. Prince Henry the Navigator sent settlers to Madeira, who cleared the huge expanses of forest to grow crops. The felled trees were processed at sawmills and shipped to the mainland.
Cornelis Corneliszoon (or Krelis Lootjes) was a Dutch windmill owner from Uitgeest who invented the first wind-powered sawmill in 1593. This made the conversion of logs into planks thirty times faster than previous manually operated sawmills.
Conversion of wood logs
Logs are converted into lumber by being sawn, hewn, or split. Sawing with a rip saw is the most common method, because sawing allows logs of lower quality, with irregular grain and large knots, to be used and is more economical. There are various types of sawing:
Plain sawn (flat sawn, through and through, bastard sawn) – A log sawn through without adjusting the position of the log and the grain runs across the width of the boards.
Quarter sawn and rift sawn – These terms have been confused in history but generally mean lumber sawn so the annual rings are reasonably perpendicular to the sides (not edges) of the lumber.
Boxed heart – The pith remains within the timber, post or beam, with some allowance for exposure.
Heart center – the center core of a log.
Free of heart center (FOHC) – A side-cut timber, post or beam without any pith.
Free of knots (FOK) – No knots are present.
Dimensional lumber
Dimensional lumber is lumber that is cut to standardized width and depth, often specified in millimetres or inches (but see below for information on nominal dimensions vs. actual dimensions). Carpenters extensively use dimensional lumber in framing wooden buildings. Common sizes include 2×4 (pictured) (also two-by-four and other variants, such as four-by-two in Australia, New Zealand, and the UK), 2×6, and 4×4. The length of a board is usually specified separately from the width and depth. It is thus possible to find 2×4s that are four, eight, and twelve feet in length. In Canada and the United States, the standard lengths of lumber are 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22 and 24 feet (1.8, 2.4, 3.0, 3.7, 4.3, 4.9, 5.5, 6.1, 6.7 and 7.3 m). For wall framing, precut "stud" lengths are available, and are commonly used. For ceilings heights of 8, 9 or 10 feet (2.4, 2.7 or 3.0 m), studs are available in 92+5⁄8 inches (2.35 m), 104+5⁄8 inches (2.66 m), and 116+5⁄8 inches (2.96 m).
North American softwoods
The length of a unit of dimensional lumber is limited by the height and girth of the tree it is milled from. In general the maximum length is 24 ft (7.32 m). Engineered wood products, manufactured by binding the strands, particles, fibers, or veneers of wood, together with adhesives, to form composite materials, offer more flexibility and greater structural strength than typical wood building materials.
Pre-cut studs save a framer much time, because they are pre-cut by the manufacturer for use in 8-, 9-, and 10-foot ceiling applications, which means the manufacturer has removed a few inches or centimetres of the piece to allow for the sill plate and the double top plate with no additional sizing necessary.
In the Americas, two-bys (2×4s, 2×6s, 2×8s, 2×10s, and 2×12s), named for traditional board thickness in inches, along with the 4×4 (89 mm × 89 mm), are common lumber sizes used in modern construction. They are the basic building blocks for such common structures as balloon-frame or platform-frame housing. Dimensional lumber made from softwood is typically used for construction, while hardwood boards are more commonly used for making cabinets or furniture.
Lumber's nominal dimensions are larger than the actual standard dimensions of finished lumber. Historically, the nominal dimensions were the size of the green (not dried), rough (unfinished) boards that eventually became smaller finished lumber through drying and planing (to smooth the wood). Today, the standards specify the final finished dimensions and the mill cuts the logs to whatever size it needs to achieve those final dimensions. Typically, that rough cut is smaller than the nominal dimensions because modern technology makes it possible to use the logs more efficiently. For example, a "2×4" board historically started out as a green, rough board actually 2 by 4 inches (51 mm × 102 mm). After drying and planing, it would be smaller by a nonstandard amount. Today, a "2×4" board starts out as something smaller than 2 inches by 4 inches and not specified by standards, and after drying and planing is minimally 1+1⁄2 by 3+1⁄2 inches (38 mm × 89 mm).
As previously noted, less wood is needed to produce a given finished size than when standards called for the green lumber to be the full nominal dimension. However, even the dimensions for finished lumber of a given nominal size have changed over time. In 1910, a typical finished 1-inch (25 mm) board was 13⁄16 in (21 mm). In 1928, that was reduced by 4%, and yet again by 4% in 1956. In 1961, the Committee on Grade Simplification and Standardization agreed to what is now the current U.S. standard: in part, the dressed size of a 1-inch (nominal) board was fixed at 3⁄4 inch; while the dressed size of 2 inch (nominal) lumber was reduced from 1+5⁄8 inch to the current 1+1⁄2 inch.
In 1964, Popular Mechanics magazine hired an independent agency to test the comparative strength of multiple samples of (A) a full-size 2×4 inches, (B) 1+5⁄8×3+5⁄8 inches, (C) 1+5⁄8×3+1⁄2 inches, and (D) 1+1⁄2×3+1⁄2 inches (today’s standard). With A’s compressive strength benchmarked as "100%," B-C-D were 90.7%, 82.2%, and 73.6% the strength of A’s full-size 2×4. Stated another way, the 1960s’ reduction of the smaller dimension from 1+5⁄8 to 1+1⁄2 inches reduced compressive strength by 10.46%.
Dimensional lumber is available in green, unfinished state, and for that kind of lumber, the nominal dimensions are the actual dimensions.
Grades and standards
Individual pieces of lumber exhibit a wide range in quality and appearance with respect to knots, slope of grain, shakes and other natural characteristics. Therefore, they vary considerably in strength, utility, and value.
The move to set national standards for lumber in the United States began with the publication of the American Lumber Standard in 1924, which set specifications for lumber dimensions, grade, and moisture content; it also developed inspection and accreditation programs. These standards have changed over the years to meet the changing needs of manufacturers and distributors, with the goal of keeping lumber competitive with other construction products. Current standards are set by the American Lumber Standard Committee, appointed by the U.S. Secretary of Commerce.
Design values for most species and grades of visually graded structural products are determined in accordance with ASTM standards, which consider the effect of strength reducing characteristics, load duration, safety, and other influencing factors. The applicable standards are based on results of tests conducted in cooperation with the USDA Forest Products Laboratory. Design Values for Wood Construction, which is a supplement to the ANSI/AF&PA National Design Specification for Wood Construction, provides these lumber design values, which are recognized by the model building codes.
Canada has grading rules that maintain a standard among mills manufacturing similar woods to assure customers of uniform quality. Grades standardize the quality of lumber at different levels and are based on moisture content, size, and manufacture at the time of grading, shipping, and unloading by the buyer. The National Lumber Grades Authority (NLGA) is responsible for writing, interpreting and maintaining Canadian lumber grading rules and standards. The Canadian Lumber Standards Accreditation Board (CLSAB) monitors the quality of Canada's lumber grading and identification system. Their common grade abbrievation, CLS, Canadian Lumber Standard is well utilised in the construction industry.
Attempts to maintain lumber quality over time have been challenged by historical changes in the timber resources of the United States – from the slow-growing virgin forests common over a century ago to the fast-growing plantations now common in today's commercial forests. Resulting declines in lumber quality have been of concern to both the lumber industry and consumers and have caused increased use of alternative construction products.
Machine stress-rated and machine-evaluated lumber are readily available for end-uses where high strength is critical, such as trusses, rafters, laminating stock, I-beams and web joints. Machine grading measures a characteristic such as stiffness or density that correlates with the structural properties of interest, such as bending strength. The result is a more precise understanding of the strength of each piece of lumber than is possible with visually graded lumber, which allows designers to use full-design strength and avoid overbuilding.
In Europe, strength grading of rectangular sawn lumber/timber (both softwood and hardwood) is done according to EN-14081 and commonly sorted into classes defined by EN-338. For softwoods, the common classes are (in increasing strength) C16, C18, C24, and C30. There are also classes specifically for hardwoods and those in most common use (in increasing strength) are D24, D30, D40, D50, D60, and D70. For these classes, the number refers to the required 5th percentile bending strength in newtons per square millimetre. There are other strength classes, including T-classes based on tension intended for use in glulam.
C14, used for scaffolding and formwork
C16 and C24, general construction
C30, prefab roof trusses and where design requires somewhat stronger joists than C24 can offer. TR26 is also a common trussed rafter strength class in long standing use in the UK.
C40, usually seen in glulam
Grading rules for African and South American sawn lumber have been developed by ATIBT according to the rules of the Sciages Avivés Tropicaux Africains (SATA) and is based on Clearcutting – established by the percentage of the clear surface.
North American hardwoods
In North America, market practices for dimensional lumber made from hardwoods varies significantly from the regularized standardized 'dimension lumber' sizes used for sales and specification of softwoods – hardwood boards are often sold totally rough cut, or machine planed only on the two (broader) face sides. When hardwood boards are also supplied with planed faces, it is usually both by random widths of a specified thickness (normally matching milling of softwood dimensional lumber) and somewhat random lengths. But besides those older (traditional and normal) situations, in recent years some product lines have been widened to also market boards in standard stock sizes; these usually retail in big-box stores and using only a relatively small set of specified lengths; in all cases hardwoods are sold to the consumer by the board-foot (144 cubic inches or 2,360 cubic centimetres), whereas that measure is not used for softwoods at the retailer (to the cognizance of the buyer).
Also in North America, hardwood lumber is commonly sold in a "quarter" system, when referring to thickness; 4/4 (four quarter) refers to a 1-inch-thick (25 mm) board, 8/4 (eight quarter) is a 2-inch-thick (51 mm) board, etc. This "quarter" system is rarely used for softwood lumber; although softwood decking is sometimes sold as 5/4, even though it is actually one inch thick (from milling 1⁄8 in or 3.2 mm off each side in a motorized planing step of production). The "quarter" system of reference is a traditional North American lumber industry nomenclature used specifically to indicate the thickness of rough sawn hardwood lumber.
In rough-sawn lumber it immediately clarifies that the lumber is not yet milled, avoiding confusion with milled dimension lumber which is measured as actual thickness after machining. Examples include 3⁄4-inch, 19 mm, or 1x. In recent years architects, designers, and builders have begun to use the "quarter" system in specifications as a vogue of insider knowledge, though the materials being specified are finished lumber, thus conflating the separate systems and causing confusion.
Hardwoods cut for furniture are cut in the fall and winter, after the sap has stopped running in the trees. If hardwoods are cut in the spring or summer the sap ruins the natural color of the lumber and decreases the value of the wood for furniture.
Engineered lumber
Engineered lumber is lumber created by a manufacturer and designed for a certain structural purpose. The main categories of engineered lumber are:
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL) – LVL comes in 1+3⁄4-inch (44 mm) thicknesses with depths such as 9+1⁄2, 11+7⁄8, 14, 16, 18 and 24 inches (240, 300, 360, 410, 460 and 610 mm), and are often doubled or tripled up. They function as beams to provide support over large spans, such as removed support walls and garage door openings, places where dimensional lumber is insufficient, and also in areas where a heavy load is bearing from a floor, wall or roof above on a somewhat short span where dimensional lumber is impractical. This type of lumber is compromised if it is altered by holes or notches anywhere within the span or at the ends, but nails can be driven into it wherever necessary to anchor the beam or to add hangers for I-joists or dimensional lumber joists that terminate at an LVL beam.
Wooden I-joists – sometimes called "TJI", "Trus Joists" or "BCI", all of which are brands of wooden I-joists, they are used for floor joists on upper floors and also in first floor conventional foundation construction on piers as opposed to slab floor construction. They are engineered for long spans and are doubled up in places where a wall will be aligned over them, and sometimes tripled where heavy roof-loaded support walls are placed above them. They consist of a top and bottom chord or flange made from dimensional lumber with a webbing in-between made from oriented strand board (OSB) (or, latterly, steel mesh forms which allow passage of services without cutting). The webbing can be removed up to certain sizes or shapes according to the manufacturer's or engineer's specifications, but for small holes, wooden I-joists come with "knockouts", which are perforated, pre-cut areas where holes can be made easily, typically without engineering approval. When large holes are needed, they can typically be made in the webbing only and only in the center third of the span; the top and bottom chords lose their integrity if cut. Sizes and shapes of the hole, and typically the placing of a hole itself, must be approved by an engineer prior to the cutting of the hole and in many areas, a sheet showing the calculations made by the engineer must be provided to the building inspection authorities before the hole will be approved. Some I-joists are made with W-style webbing like a truss to eliminate cutting and to allow ductwork to pass through.
Finger-jointed lumber – solid dimensional lumber lengths typically are limited to lengths of 22 to 24 feet (6.7–7.3 m), but can be made longer by the technique of "finger-jointing" by using small solid pieces, usually 18 to 24 inches (460–610 mm) long, and joining them together using finger joints and glue to produce lengths that can be up to 36 feet (11 m) long in 2×6 size. Finger-jointing also is predominant in precut wall studs. It is also an affordable alternative for non-structural hardwood that will be painted (staining would leave the finger-joints visible). Care is taken during construction to avoid nailing directly into a glued joint as stud breakage can occur.
Glulam beams – created from 2×4 or 2×6 stock by gluing the faces together to create beams such as 4×12 or 6×16. As such, a beam acts as one larger piece of lumber – thus eliminating the need to harvest larger, older trees for the same size beam.
Manufactured trusses – trusses are used in home construction as a pre-fabricated replacement for roof rafters and ceiling joists (stick-framing). It is seen as an easier installation and a better solution for supporting roofs than the use of dimensional lumber's struts and purlins as bracing. In the southern U.S. and elsewhere, stick-framing with dimensional lumber roof support is still predominant. The main drawbacks of trusses are reduced attic space, time required for engineering and ordering, and a cost higher than the dimensional lumber needed if the same project were conventionally framed. The advantages are significantly reduced labor costs (installation is faster than conventional framing), consistency, and overall schedule savings.
Various pieces and cuts
Square and rectangular forms: plank, slat, batten, board, lath, strapping (typically 3⁄4 in × 1+1⁄2 in [19 mm × 38 mm]), cant (A partially sawn log such as sawn on two sides or squared to a large size and later resawn into lumber. A flitch is a type of cant with wane on one or both sides). Various pieces are also known by their uses such as post, beam, (girt), stud, rafter, joist, sill plate, wall plate.
Rod forms: pole, (dowel), stick (staff, baton)
Timber piles
In the United States, pilings are mainly cut from southern yellow pines and Douglas-fir. Treated pilings are available in chromated copper arsenate retentions of 0.60, 0.80 and 2.50 pounds per cubic foot (9.6, 12.8 and 40.0 kg/m3) if treatment is required.
Historical Chinese construction
Under the prescription of the Method of Construction (營造法式) issued by the Song dynasty government in the early twelfth century, timbers were standardized to eight cross-sectional dimensions. Regardless of the actual dimensions of the timber, the ratio between width and height was maintained at 1:1.5. Units are in Song dynasty inches (31.2 mm).
Timber smaller than the 8th class were called "unclassed" (等外). The width of a timber is referred to as one "timber" (材), and the dimensions of other structural components were quoted in multiples of "timber"; thus, as the width of the actual timber varied, the dimensions of other components were easily calculated, without resorting to specific figures for each scale. The dimensions of timbers in similar applications show a gradual diminution from the Sui dynasty (580–618) to the modern era; a 1st class timber during the Sui was reconstructed as 15×10 (Sui dynasty inches, or 29.4 mm).
Defects in lumber
Defects occurring in lumber are grouped into the following four divisions:
Conversion
During the process of converting timber to commercial forms of lumber the following defects may occur:
Chip mark: this defect is indicated by the marks or signs placed by chips on the finished surface of timber
Diagonal grain: improper sawing of timber
Torn grain: when a small dent is made on the finished surface due to falling of some tool
Wane: presence of original rounded surface in the finished product
Defects due to fungi and animals
Fungi attack wood (both timber and lumber) when these conditions are all present:
The wood moisture content is above 25% on a dry-weight basis
The environment is sufficiently warm
Oxygen (O2) is present
Wood with less than 25% moisture (dry weight basis) can remain free of decay for centuries. Similarly, wood submerged in water may not be attacked by fungi if the amount of oxygen is inadequate.
Fungi lumber/timber defects:
Blue stain
Brown rot
Dry rot
Heart rot
Sap stain
Wet rot
White rot
Following are the insects and molluscs which are usually responsible for the decay of timber/lumber:
Woodboring beetles
Marine borers (Barnea similis)
Teredos (Teredo navalis)
Termites
Carpenter ants
Carpenter bees
Natural forces
There are two main natural forces responsible for causing defects in timber and lumber: abnormal growth and rupture of tissues. Rupture of tissue includes cracks or splits in the wood called "shakes". "Ring shake", "wind shake", or "ring failure" is when the wood grain separates around the growth rings either while standing or during felling. Shakes may reduce the strength of a timber and the appearance thus reduce lumber grade and may capture moisture, promoting decay. Eastern hemlock is known for having ring shake. A "check" is a crack on the surface of the wood caused by the outside of a timber shrinking as it seasons. Checks may extend to the pith and follow the grain. Like shakes, checks can hold water promoting rot. A "split" goes all the way through a timber. Checks and splits occur more frequently at the ends of lumber because of the more rapid drying in these locations.
Next to defects, uneven expansion or contraction caused by changes in moisture content will cause sawed timber to warp, making it less suitable for many purposes.
Seasoning
The seasoning of lumber is typically either kiln- or air-dried. Defects due to seasoning are the main cause of splits, bowing and honeycombing. Seasoning is the process of drying timber to remove the bound moisture contained in the walls of the wood cells to produce seasoned timber.
Durability and service life
Under proper conditions, wood provides excellent, lasting performance. However, it also faces several potential threats to service life, including fungal activity and insect damage – which can be avoided in numerous ways. Section 2304.11 of the International Building Code addresses protection against decay and termites. This section provides requirements for non-residential construction applications, such as wood used above ground (e.g., for framing, decks, stairs, etc.), as well as other applications.
There are four recommended methods to protect wood-frame structures against durability hazards and thus provide maximum service life for the building. All require proper design and construction:
Controlling moisture using design techniques to avoid decay
Providing effective control of termites and other insects
Using durable materials such as pressure-treated or naturally durable species of wood where appropriate
Providing quality assurance during design and construction and throughout the building's service life using appropriate maintenance practices
Moisture control
Wood is a hygroscopic material, which means it naturally absorbs and releases water to balance its internal moisture content with the surrounding environment. The moisture content of wood is measured by the weight of water as a percentage of the oven-dry weight of the wood fiber. The key to controlling decay is controlling moisture. Once decay fungi are established, the minimum moisture content for decay to propagate is 22 to 24 percent, so building experts recommend 19 percent as the maximum safe moisture content for untreated wood in service. Water by itself does not harm the wood, but rather, wood with consistently high moisture content enables fungal organisms to grow.
The primary objective when addressing moisture loads is to keep water from entering the building envelope in the first place and to balance the moisture content within the building itself. Moisture control by means of accepted design and construction details is a simple and practical method of protecting a wood-frame building against decay. For applications with a high risk of staying wet, designers specify durable materials such as naturally decay-resistant species or wood that has been treated with preservatives. Cladding, shingles, sill plates and exposed timbers or glulam beams are examples of potential applications for treated wood.
Preservatives
To avoid decay and termite infestation, untreated wood is separated from the ground and other sources of moisture. These separations are required by many building codes and are considered necessary to maintain wood elements in permanent structures at a safe moisture content for decay protection. When it is not possible to separate wood from the sources of moisture, designers often rely on preservative-treated wood.
Wood can be treated with a preservative that improves service life under severe conditions without altering its basic characteristics. It can also be pressure-impregnated with fire-retardant chemicals that improve its performance in a fire. One of the early treatments to "fireproof lumber", which retard fires, was developed in 1936 by the Protexol Corporation, in which lumber is heavily treated with salt. Wood does not deteriorate simply because it gets wet. When wood breaks down, it is because an organism is eating it. Preservatives work by making the food source inedible to these organisms. Properly preservative-treated wood can have 5 to 10 times the service life of untreated wood. Preserved wood is used most often for railroad ties, utility poles, marine piles, decks, fences and other outdoor applications. Various treatment methods and types of chemicals are available, depending on the attributes required in the particular application and the level of protection needed.
There are two basic methods of treating: with and without pressure. Non-pressure methods are the application of preservatives by brushing, spraying, or dipping the piece to be treated. Deeper, more thorough penetration is achieved by driving the preservative into the wood cells with pressure. Various combinations of pressure and vacuum are used to force adequate levels of chemical into the wood. Pressure-treating preservatives consist of chemicals carried in a solvent.
Chromated copper arsenate, once the most commonly used wood preservative in North America began being phased out of most residential applications in 2004. Replacing it are amine copper quat and copper azole.
All wood preservatives used in the United States and Canada are registered and regularly re-examined for safety by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Health Canada's Pest Management and Regulatory Agency, respectively.
Timber framing
Timber framing is a style of construction that uses heavier framing elements (larger posts and beams) than modern stick framing, which uses smaller standard dimensional lumber. The timbers are cut from log boles and squared with a saw, broadaxe or adze, and then joined together with joinery without nails. Modern timber framing has been growing in popularity in the United States since the 1970s.
Environmental effects of lumber
Green building minimizes the impact or "environmental footprint" of a building. Wood is a major building material that is renewable and replenishable in a continuous cycle. Studies show manufacturing wood uses less energy and results in less air and water pollution than steel and concrete. However, demand for lumber is blamed for deforestation.
Residual wood
The conversion from coal to biomass power is a growing trend in the United States.
The United Kingdom, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Australia, Fiji, Madagascar, Mongolia, Russia, Denmark, Switzerland, and Eswatini governments all support an increased role for energy derived from biomass, which are organic materials available on a renewable basis and include residues and/or byproducts of the logging, saw milling and paper-making processes. In particular, they view it as a way to lower greenhouse gas emissions by reducing the consumption of oil and gas while supporting the growth of forestry, agriculture and rural economies. Studies by the U.S. government have found the country's combined forest and agriculture land resources have the power to sustainably supply more than one-third of its current petroleum consumption.
Biomass is already an important source of energy for the North American forest products industry. It is common for companies to have cogeneration facilities, also known as combined heat and power, which convert some of the biomass that results from wood and paper manufacturing to electrical and thermal energy in the form of steam. The electricity is used to, among other things, dry lumber and supply heat to the dryers used in paper-making.
Environmental impacts
Lumber is a sustainable and environmentally friendly construction material that could replace modern building materials (e.g. concrete and steel) given its structural performance, capacity to fixate CO2 and low energy demand during the manufacturing process.
Substituting lumber for concrete or steel avoids the carbon emissions of those materials. Cement and concrete manufacture is responsible for around 8% of global GHG emissions while the iron and steel industry is responsible for another 5% (half a ton of CO2 is emitted to manufacture a ton of concrete; two tons of CO2 are emitted in the manufacture of a ton of steel).
Advantages of lumber:
Fire performance: In the case of fire, the outer layer of mass timber will tend to char in a predictable way that effectively self-extinguishes and shields the interior, allowing it to retain structural integrity for several hours, even in an intense fire.
Reduction of carbon emissions: Building materials and construction make up 11% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Though the exact amount will depend on tree species, forestry practices, transportation costs, and several other factors, that one cubic meter of lumber sequesters roughly one tonne of CO2. It is estimated that wood can reduce the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere by half. In addition, wood has a significant CO2 storage capacity, which limits its release. However, when wood is destroyed (naturally or by combustion), all of the previously stored CO2 is released into the atmosphere.
Natural insulation: lumber is a natural insulator which makes it particularly good for windows and doors.
Less construction time, labor costs, and waste: it is easy to manufacture prefabricated lumber, from which pieces can be assembled simultaneously (with relatively little labor). This reduces material waste, avoids massive on-site inventory, and minimizes on-site disruption. According to the softwood lumber industry, "Mass timber buildings are roughly 25% faster to construct than concrete buildings and require 90% less construction traffic".
End-of-life
An EPA study showed the typical end-of-life scenario for wood waste from municipal solid waste (MSW), wood packaging, and other miscellaneous wood products in the US. Based on the 2018 data, about 67% of wood waste was landfilled, 16% incinerated with energy recovery, and 17% recycled.
A 2020 study conducted by Edinburgh Napier University demonstrated the proportional waste stream of recovered lumber in the UK. The study showed that timber from municipal solid waste and packaging waste made up 13 and 26% of waste collected. Construction and demolition waste made up the biggest bulk of waste collectively at 52%, with the remaining 10% coming from industry.
In the circular economy
The lumber industry creates large amounts of waste, especially in its manufacturing process. From log debarking to finished products, there are several stages of processing that generate a considerable volume of waste, which includes solid wood waste, harmful gases, and residual water.
One of the studies conducted in Hong Kong was done using life-cycle assessment (LCA). The study aimed to assess and compare the environmental impacts of wood waste management from building construction activities using different alternative management scenarios in Hong Kong. Despite various advantages of lumber and its waste, the contribution to the study of the circular economy of lumber is still very small. Some areas where improvements can be made to improve the circularity of lumber is as follows:
First, regulations to support recycled lumber use. For example, establishing grading standards and enforcing penalties for improper disposal, especially in sectors that produce big quantities of wood waste, such as the construction and demolition sector.
Second, creating a stronger supply force. This can be achieved by improving demolition protocol and technology and enhancing the secondary raw materials market through circular business models.
Third, increase demand by introducing incentives to the construction sector and new homeowners to use recycled lumber. This can be in the form of reduced taxes for the construction of the new build.
Secondary raw material
The term secondary raw material denotes waste material that has been recycled and injected back into use as productive material. Lumber has a high potential to be used as a secondary raw material at various stages, as listed below:
Recovery of branches and leaves for use as fertilisers
Timber undergo multiple processing stages before lumber of desired shapes, size, and standards are achieved for commercial use. The process generates a lot of waste which in most cases is disregarded. But being an organic waste, the positive aspect of such waste is that it can be used as a fertiliser or to protect the soil in severe weather conditions.
Recovery of woodchips for thermal energy generation
Waste generated during the manufacturing of lumber products can be used to produce thermal energy. Lumber products after their end-of-life can be downcycled into chips and be used as biomass to produce thermal energy. It is beneficial for industries that need thermal energy.
Circular economy practices offer effective solutions concerning waste. It targets its unnecessary generation through waste reduction, reuse, and recycling. There is no clear explicit evidence of circular economy in the wood panel industry. However, based on the circular economy concept and its characteristics, there are opportunities present in the wood panel industry from the raw material extraction phase to its end-of-life. Therefore, there lies a gap yet to be explored.

Magnetite is a mineral and one of the main iron ores, with the chemical formula Fe2+Fe3+2O4. It is one of the oxides of iron, and is ferrimagnetic; it is attracted to a magnet and can be magnetized to become a permanent magnet itself. With the exception of extremely rare native iron deposits, it is the most magnetic of all the naturally occurring minerals on Earth. Naturally magnetized pieces of magnetite, called lodestone, will attract small pieces of iron, which is how ancient peoples first discovered the property of magnetism.
Magnetite is black or brownish-black with a metallic luster, has a Mohs hardness of 5–6 and leaves a black streak. Small grains of magnetite are very common in igneous and metamorphic rocks.
The chemical IUPAC name is iron(II,III) oxide and the common chemical name is ferrous-ferric oxide.
Properties
In addition to igneous rocks, magnetite also occurs in sedimentary rocks, including banded iron formations and in lake and marine sediments as both detrital grains and as magnetofossils. Magnetite nanoparticles are also thought to form in soils, where they probably oxidize rapidly to maghemite.
Crystal structure
The chemical composition of magnetite is Fe2+(Fe3+)2(O2-)4. This indicates that magnetite contains both ferrous (divalent) and ferric (trivalent) iron, suggesting crystallization in an environment containing intermediate levels of oxygen. The main details of its structure were established in 1915. It was one of the first crystal structures to be obtained using X-ray diffraction. It has an inverse spinel structure, with O2- ions forming a face-centered cubic lattice and iron cations occupying interstitial sites. Half of the Fe3+ cations occupy tetrahedral sites while the other half, along with Fe2+ cations, occupy octahedral sites. The unit cell consists of thirty-two O2- ions and unit cell length is a = 0.839 nm.
As a member of the inverse spinel group, magnetite can form solid solutions with similarly structured minerals, including ulvospinel (Fe2TiO4) and magnesioferrite (MgFe2O4).
Titanomagnetite, also known as titaniferous magnetite, is a solid solution between magnetite and ulvospinel that crystallizes in many mafic igneous rocks. Titanomagnetite may undergo oxy-exsolution during cooling, resulting in ingrowths of magnetite and ilmenite.
Crystal morphology and size
Natural and synthetic magnetite occurs most commonly as octahedral crystals bounded by {111} planes and as rhombic-dodecahedra. Twinning occurs on the {111} plane.
Hydrothermal synthesis usually produces single octahedral crystals which can be as large as 10 millimetres (3⁄8 inch) across. In the presence of mineralizers such as 0.1 M HI or 2 M NH4Cl and at 0.207 MPa at 416–800 °C, magnetite grew as crystals whose shapes were a combination of rhombic-dodechahedra forms. The crystals were more rounded than usual. The appearance of higher forms was considered as a result from a decrease in the surface energies caused by the lower surface to volume ratio in the rounded crystals.
Reactions
Magnetite has been important in understanding the conditions under which rocks form. Magnetite reacts with oxygen to produce hematite, and the mineral pair forms a buffer that can control how oxidizing its environment is (the oxygen fugacity). This buffer is known as the hematite-magnetite or HM buffer. At lower oxygen levels, magnetite can form a buffer with quartz and fayalite known as the QFM buffer. At still lower oxygen levels, magnetite forms a buffer with wüstite known as the MW buffer. The QFM and MW buffers have been used extensively in laboratory experiments on rock chemistry. The QFM buffer, in particular, produces an oxygen fugacity close to that of most igneous rocks.
Commonly, igneous rocks contain solid solutions of both titanomagnetite and hemoilmenite or titanohematite. Compositions of the mineral pairs are used to calculate oxygen fugacity: a range of oxidizing conditions are found in magmas and the oxidation state helps to determine how the magmas might evolve by fractional crystallization. Magnetite also is produced from peridotites and dunites by serpentinization.
Magnetic properties
Lodestones were used as an early form of magnetic compass. Magnetite has been a critical tool in paleomagnetism, a science important in understanding plate tectonics and as historic data for magnetohydrodynamics and other scientific fields.
The relationships between magnetite and other iron oxide minerals such as ilmenite, hematite, and ulvospinel have been much studied; the reactions between these minerals and oxygen influence how and when magnetite preserves a record of the Earth's magnetic field.
At low temperatures, magnetite undergoes a crystal structure phase transition from a monoclinic structure to a cubic structure known as the Verwey transition. Optical studies show that this metal to insulator transition is sharp and occurs around 120 K. The Verwey transition is dependent on grain size, domain state, pressure, and the iron-oxygen stoichiometry. An isotropic point also occurs near the Verwey transition around 130 K, at which point the sign of the magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant changes from positive to negative. The Curie temperature of magnetite is 580 °C (853 K; 1,076 °F).
If magnetite is in a large enough quantity it can be found in aeromagnetic surveys using a magnetometer which measures magnetic intensities.
Melting point
Solid magnetite particles melt at about 1,583–1,597 °C (2,881–2,907 °F).
Distribution of deposits
Magnetite is sometimes found in large quantities in beach sand. Such black sands (mineral sands or iron sands) are found in various places, such as Lung Kwu Tan in Hong Kong; California, United States; and the west coast of the North Island of New Zealand. The magnetite, eroded from rocks, is carried to the beach by rivers and concentrated by wave action and currents. Huge deposits have been found in banded iron formations. These sedimentary rocks have been used to infer changes in the oxygen content of the atmosphere of the Earth.
Large deposits of magnetite are also found in the Atacama region of Chile (Chilean Iron Belt); the Valentines region of Uruguay; Kiruna, Sweden; the Tallawang region of New South Wales; and in the Adirondack Mountains of New York in the United States. Kediet ej Jill, the highest mountain of Mauritania, is made entirely of the mineral. In the municipalities of Molinaseca, Albares, and Rabanal del Camino, in the province of León (Spain), there is a magnetite deposit in Ordovician terrain, considered one of the largest in Europe. It was exploited between 1955 and 1982. Deposits are also found in Norway, Romania, and Ukraine. Magnetite-rich sand dunes are found in southern Peru. In 2005, an exploration company, Cardero Resources, discovered a vast deposit of magnetite-bearing sand dunes in Peru. The dune field covers 250 square kilometers (100 sq mi), with the highest dune at over 2,000 meters (6,560 ft) above the desert floor. The sand contains 10% magnetite.
In large enough quantities magnetite can affect compass navigation. In Tasmania there are many areas with highly magnetized rocks that can greatly influence compasses. Extra steps and repeated observations are required when using a compass in Tasmania to keep navigation problems to the minimum.
Magnetite crystals with a cubic habit are rare but have been found at Balmat, St. Lawrence County, New York, and at Långban, Sweden. This habit may be a result of crystallization in the presence of cations such as zinc.
Magnetite can also be found in fossils due to biomineralization and are referred to as magnetofossils. There are also instances of magnetite with origins in space coming from meteorites.
Biological occurrences
Biomagnetism is usually related to the presence of biogenic crystals of magnetite, which occur widely in organisms. These organisms range from magnetotactic bacteria (e.g., Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum) to animals, including humans, where magnetite crystals (and other magnetically sensitive compounds) are found in different organs, depending on the species. Biomagnetites account for the effects of weak magnetic fields on biological systems. There is also a chemical basis for cellular sensitivity to electric and magnetic fields (galvanotaxis).
Pure magnetite particles are biomineralized in magnetosomes, which are produced by several species of magnetotactic bacteria. Magnetosomes consist of long chains of oriented magnetite particles that are used by bacteria for navigation. After the death of these bacteria, the magnetite particles in magnetosomes may be preserved in sediments as magnetofossils. Some types of anaerobic bacteria that are not magnetotactic can also create magnetite in oxygen free sediments by reducing amorphic ferric oxide to magnetite.
Several species of birds are known to incorporate magnetite crystals in the upper beak for magnetoreception, which (in conjunction with cryptochromes in the retina) gives them the ability to sense the direction, polarity, and magnitude of the ambient magnetic field.
Chitons, a type of mollusk, have a tongue-like structure known as a radula, covered with magnetite-coated teeth, or denticles. The hardness of the magnetite helps in breaking down food.
Biological magnetite may store information about the magnetic fields the organism was exposed to, potentially allowing scientists to learn about the migration of the organism or about changes in the Earth's magnetic field over time.
Human brain
Living organisms can produce magnetite. In humans, magnetite can be found in various parts of the brain including the frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes, brainstem, cerebellum and basal ganglia. Iron can be found in three forms in the brain – magnetite, hemoglobin (blood) and ferritin (protein), and areas of the brain related to motor function generally contain more iron. Magnetite can be found in the hippocampus. The hippocampus is associated with information processing, specifically learning and memory. However, magnetite can have toxic effects due to its charge or magnetic nature and its involvement in oxidative stress or the production of free radicals. Research suggests that beta-amyloid plaques and tau proteins associated with neurodegenerative disease frequently occur after oxidative stress and the build-up of iron.
Some researchers also suggest that humans possess a magnetic sense, proposing that this could allow certain people to use magnetoreception for navigation. The role of magnetite in the brain is still not well understood, and there has been a general lag in applying more modern, interdisciplinary techniques to the study of biomagnetism.
Electron microscope scans of human brain-tissue samples are able to differentiate between magnetite produced by the body's own cells and magnetite absorbed from airborne pollution, the natural forms being jagged and crystalline, while magnetite pollution occurs as rounded nanoparticles. Potentially a human health hazard, airborne magnetite is a result of pollution (specifically combustion). These nanoparticles can travel to the brain via the olfactory nerve, increasing the concentration of magnetite in the brain. In some brain samples, the nanoparticle pollution outnumbers the natural particles by as much as 100:1, and such pollution-borne magnetite particles may be linked to abnormal neural deterioration. In one study, the characteristic nanoparticles were found in the brains of 37 people: 29 of these, aged 3 to 85, had lived and died in Mexico City, a significant air pollution hotspot. Some of the further eight, aged 62 to 92, from Manchester, England, had died with varying severities of neurodegenerative diseases. Such particles could conceivably contribute to diseases like Alzheimer's disease. Though a causal link has not yet been established, laboratory studies suggest that iron oxides such as magnetite are a component of protein plaques in the brain. Such plaques have been linked to Alzheimer's disease.
Increased iron levels, specifically magnetic iron, have been found in portions of the brain in Alzheimer's patients. Monitoring changes in iron concentrations may make it possible to detect the loss of neurons and the development of neurodegenerative diseases prior to the onset of symptoms due to the relationship between magnetite and ferritin. In tissue, magnetite and ferritin can produce small magnetic fields which will interact with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) creating contrast. Huntington patients have not shown increased magnetite levels; however, high levels have been found in study mice.
Applications
Due to its high iron content, magnetite has long been a major iron ore. It is reduced in blast furnaces to pig iron or sponge iron for conversion to steel.
Magnetic recording
Audio recording using magnetic acetate tape was developed in the 1930s. The German magnetophon first utilized magnetite powder that BASF coated onto cellulose acetate before soon switching to gamma ferric oxide for its superior morphology. Following World War II, 3M Company continued work on the German design. In 1946, the 3M researchers found they could also improve their own magnetite-based paper tape, which utilized powders of cubic crystals, by replacing the magnetite with needle-shaped particles of gamma ferric oxide (γ-Fe2O3).
Catalysis
Approximately 2–3% of the world's energy budget is allocated to the Haber Process for nitrogen fixation, which relies on magnetite-derived catalysts. The industrial catalyst is obtained from finely ground iron powder, which is usually obtained by reduction of high-purity magnetite. The pulverized iron metal is burnt (oxidized) to give magnetite or wüstite of a defined particle size. The magnetite (or wüstite) particles are then partially reduced, removing some of the oxygen in the process. The resulting catalyst particles consist of a core of magnetite, encased in a shell of wüstite, which in turn is surrounded by an outer shell of iron metal. The catalyst maintains most of its bulk volume during the reduction, resulting in a highly porous high-surface-area material, which enhances its effectiveness as a catalyst.
Magnetite nanoparticles
Magnetite micro- and nanoparticles are used in a variety of applications, from biomedical to environmental. One use is in water purification: in high gradient magnetic separation, magnetite nanoparticles introduced into contaminated water will bind to the suspended particles (solids, bacteria, or plankton, for example) and settle to the bottom of the fluid, allowing the contaminants to be removed and the magnetite particles to be recycled and reused. This method works with radioactive and carcinogenic particles as well, making it an important cleanup tool in the case of heavy metals introduced into water systems.
Another application of magnetic nanoparticles is in the creation of ferrofluids. These are used in several ways. Ferrofluids can be used for targeted drug delivery in the human body. The magnetization of the particles bound with drug molecules allows "magnetic dragging" of the solution to the desired area of the body. This would allow the treatment of only a small area of the body, rather than the body as a whole, and could be highly useful in cancer treatment, among other things. Ferrofluids are also used in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology.
Coal mining industry
For the separation of coal from waste, dense medium baths are used. This technique employs the difference in densities between coal (1.3–1.4 tonnes per m3) and shales (2.2–2.4 tonnes per m3). In a medium with intermediate density (water with magnetite), stones sink and coal floats.
Magnetene
Magnetene is a two-dimensional flat sheet of magnetite noted for its ultra-low-friction properties.
Gallery

The Marcus Wallenberg Prize is the highest award in the field of forestry.
Established in 1981, the award is modeled on the Nobel Prize, and colloquially called the "Nobel Prize for Forestry". The award is named after the Swedish Industrialist Marcus Wallenberg Jr. who was managing director and subsequently chairman of Stockholms Enskilda Bank and later chairman and honorary chairman of Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken, as well as chairman and honorary chairman of a number of Swedish and international organisations and companies. The Marcus Wallenberg Prize was instituted by Stora Kopparbergs Bergslags AB at its annual meeting in 1980 to commemorate the services rendered by Dr. Marcus Wallenberg during his long term as member and chairman of the board of directors.
Every year a selection committee decides on the recipient from nominations received from academics and research organisations. The award is awarded in the autumn of each year in Stockholm, Sweden, at a symposium consisting of lectures from the recipient and invited speakers. The 2020 Award ceremony was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recipients

A Markwald is an area of woodland that is jointly managed by several villages or towns. It is an historic term that is used in German-speaking Europe and roughly means "common forest."
The woods in a Markwald do not therefore belong to the territory (Gemarkung) of the individual villages, but were part of a joint territory, run by a co-operative, the so-called Markgenossenschaft. Even when a Markgenossenschaft is dissolved, the term Markwald often continues to be used today as the name of the woodland.
Inhabitants of the surrounding municipalities, so long as they are part of the Markgenossenschaft, have the right to fell timber in the Markwald, to leave their cattle to graze in the forest (e.g. droving or pannage) and so on. Hunting rights were not included however. Members of the Markgenossenschaft have a percentage share in the woods, but no specific claim to ownership. They have the right of co-determination and the type of management to be carried out, is jointly agreed, on the advice of the forester responsible, at their annual general meetings. They can, for example, decide if and where plantations are established and whether wind generators may be built within the forest area. They also benefit for example if the income from timber sales or hunting licences exceeds the expenditure.
Other meanings
Markwald is also e.g. a quarter in the town of Mühlheim am Main.
Markwald is a male, Germanic personal name and a surname.

Matthew 10:34 is the 34th verse in the tenth chapter of the Gospel of Matthew in the New Testament.
Content
In the original Greek according to Westcott-Hort, this verse is:
Μὴ νομίσητε ὅτι ἦλθον βαλεῖν εἰρήνην ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν· οὐκ ἦλθον βαλεῖν εἰρήνην, ἀλλὰ μάχαιραν.
In the King James Version of the Bible the text reads:
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.
The New International Version translates the passage as:
"Do not suppose that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I did not come to bring peace, but a sword.
Analysis
This wording seems to be at variance with Jesus' title of "Prince of Peace" (see Isaiah 9:6,7; 65:25). However, Lapide explains He comes to bring a spiritual peace of mind and a peace among the faithful, but not an earthly peace.
This is a much-discussed passage, often explained in terms of the "apocalyptic-eschatological" context of the 1st century.
R. T. France explains the verse, in context with the subsequent verse 35: "The sword Jesus brings is not here military conflict, but, as vv. 35–36 show, a sharp social division which even severs the closest family ties. … Jesus speaks here, as in the preceding and following verses, more of a division in men’s personal response to him."
The text of Matthew's Gospel in the Book of Kells alters gladium, the Vulgate translation of makhairan 'sword", to gaudium, 'joy', resulting in a reading of "I came not [only] to bring peace, but [also] joy".
Commentary from the Church Fathers
Jerome: "He had before said, What I say to you in darkness, that speak ye in the light; He now tells them what will follow upon that preaching, saying, Think not that I am come to send peace upon earth; I am not come to send peace, but a sword."
Glossa Ordinaria: "Or connect it with what has gone before, As the fear of death ought not to draw you away, so neither ought carnal affection."
Chrysostom: "How then did He enjoin them, that when they should enter any house they should say, Peace be to this house, as also the Angels sung, Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace to men. (Luke 2:14) That is the most perfect peace when that which is diseased is lopped off, when that which introduces strife is taken away, for so only is it possible that heaven should be joined to earth. For so does the physician save the rest of the body, namely by cutting off that which cannot be healed. So it came to pass at the tower of Babel; a happy discord broke up their bad union. So also Paul divided those who were conspired together against him. For concord is not in all cases good; for there is honour among thieves. And this combat is not of His setting before them, but of the plots of the world."

Medium-scale mining refers to mining that is larger than artisanal or small-scale mining but smaller than large-scale mining. Its exact definition may vary by country and also between different organizations within a country. Some criteria are based on the yearly man-hours employed in the mining operation and others on either the total mass ore extracted, the mass of metal (or non-metallic mineral) extracted or the dry-equivalent mass of ore concentrate produced.
Definitions
The Chilean mining guild Sociedad Nacional de Minería (SONAMI) defines medium-scale mining as those producing copper in the range of 1,500 to 50,000 metric tons per year. For the mining of other metals and non-metallic mining SONAMI's definition of medium-scale mining is based on equivalents on the tonnage that defines medium-scale copper mining. For Chile's National Geology and Mining Service medium-scale mining is that which employ between 1 million and 200 thousand man-hours per year, which is equivalent to a full-time workforce of between 80 and 400 persons. For Chilean state-owned company Empresa Nacional de Minería (ENAMI) medium-scale mining is different from the small scale mining in that it has a monthly produce of exceeding one of the following; 300 metric tons of dry copper concentrate, 150 metric tons of dry gold-silver concentrate, 100 metric tons of dry copper precipitate or else a total produce of 10,000 metric tons of mineral. The Chilean Copper Commission uses a definition offered by the Instituto de Ingenieros de Minas de Chile in 1990 which considers medium-scale mining as those mining companies producing between 3,000,000 and 100,000 metric tons of copper yearly (8,000 to 300 dayly). In Peru the law Ley General de Minería defines medium-scale mining as that which has a dayly produce of in the range from 350 to 5,000 metric tons ore concentrate or more processesed ore.
Medium-scale mining in Chile
In Chile medium-scale mining (Spanish: mediana minería) is concentrated near roads or other pre-existing infrastructure, and lie thus away from the high Andes where nearly all mines belong to the large-scale mining category. For mines with an annual produce of less than 10,000 metric tons a simplified mine closure procedure apply in Chile. ENAMI has in its role the purchase of ore from medium and small-scale mining which it does at stabilized prices to avoid volatility. There are multiple policies in Chile that tend to group media and small-scale mining together. Medium-scale mining in Chile tend to focus on copper and produced about 4.5% of the copper mined in the country from 2017 to 2021, with Chile being the world's largest producer of copper.
Medium-scale mining in Chile has a high rate of success in the environmental impact assessments with an approval rate of 92% from 2017 to 2022. Yet these approvals last each for a few years as projects submitted by medium-scale mining involve short time-frames. A 2017 study show that medium-scale mining in Chile is 23% less efficient in its use of water relative to large-scale mining, yet it has been suggested to be in favourable conditions to apply environmental techniques such as dry tailings relative to large-scale mining.

In metalworking and jewelry making, casting is a process in which a liquid metal is delivered into a mold (usually by a crucible) that contains a negative impression (i.e., a three-dimensional negative image) of the intended shape. The metal is poured into the mold through a hollow channel called a sprue. The metal and mold are then cooled, and the metal part (the casting) is extracted. Casting is most often used for making complex shapes that would be difficult or uneconomical to make by other methods.
Casting processes have been known for thousands of years, and have been widely used for sculpture (especially in bronze), jewelry in precious metals, and weapons and tools. Highly engineered castings are found in 90 percent of durable goods, including cars, trucks, aerospace, trains, mining and construction equipment, oil wells, appliances, pipes, hydrants, wind turbines, nuclear plants, medical devices, defense products, toys, and more.
Traditional techniques include lost-wax casting (which may be further divided into centrifugal casting, and vacuum assist direct pour casting), plaster mold casting and sand casting.
The modern casting process is subdivided into two main categories: expendable and non-expendable casting. It is further broken down by the mold material, such as sand or metal, and pouring method, such as gravity, vacuum, or low pressure.
Expendable mold casting
Expendable mold casting is a generic classification that includes sand, plastic, shell, plaster, and investment (lost-wax technique) moldings. This method of mold casting involves the use of temporary, non-reusable molds.
Sand casting
Sand casting is one of the most popular and simplest types of casting, and has been used for centuries. Sand casting allows for smaller batches than permanent mold casting and at a very reasonable cost. Not only does this method allow manufacturers to create products at a low cost, but there are other benefits to sand casting, such as very small-size operations. The process allows for castings small enough fit in the palm of one's hand to those large enough for a train car bed (one casting can create the entire bed for one rail car). Sand casting also allows most metals to be cast depending on the type of sand used for the molds.
Sand casting requires a lead time of days, or even weeks sometimes, for production at high output rates (1–20 pieces/hr-mold) and is unsurpassed for large-part production. Green (moist) sand, which is black in color, has almost no part weight limit, whereas dry sand has a practical part mass limit of 2,300–2,700 kg (5,100–6,000 lb). Minimum part weight ranges from 0.075–0.1 kg (0.17–0.22 lb). The sand is bonded using clays, chemical binders, or polymerized oils (such as motor oil). Sand can be recycled many times in most operations and requires little maintenance.
Loam molding
Loam molding has been used to produce large symmetrical objects such as cannon and church bells. Loam is a mixture of clay and sand with straw or dung. A model of the produced is formed in a friable material (the chemise). The mold is formed around this chemise by covering it with loam. This is then baked (fired) and the chemise removed. The mold is then stood upright in a pit in front of the furnace for the molten metal to be poured. Afterwards the mold is broken off. Molds can thus only be used once, so that other methods are preferred for most purposes.
Plaster mold casting
Plaster casting is similar to sand casting except that plaster of paris is used instead of sand as a mold material. Generally, the form takes less than a week to prepare, after which a production rate of 1–10 units/hr-mold is achieved, with items as massive as 45 kg (99 lb) and as small as 30 g (1 oz) with very good surface finish and close tolerances. Plaster casting is an inexpensive alternative to other molding processes for complex parts due to the low cost of the plaster and its ability to produce near net shape castings. The biggest disadvantage is that it can only be used with low melting point non-ferrous materials, such as aluminium, copper, magnesium, and zinc.
Shell molding
Shell molding is similar to sand casting, but the molding cavity is formed by a hardened "shell" of sand instead of a flask filled with sand. The sand used is finer than sand casting sand and is mixed with a resin so that it can be heated by the pattern and hardened into a shell around the pattern. Because of the resin and finer sand, it gives a much finer surface finish. The process is easily automated and more precise than sand casting. Common metals that are cast include cast iron, aluminium, magnesium, and copper alloys. This process is ideal for complex items that are small to medium-sized.
Investment casting
Investment casting (known as lost-wax casting in art) is a process that has been practiced for thousands of years, with the lost-wax process being one of the oldest known metal forming techniques. From 5000 years ago, when beeswax formed the pattern, to today's high technology waxes, refractory materials, and specialist alloys, the castings ensure high-quality components are produced with the key benefits of accuracy, repeatability, versatility, and integrity.
Investment casting derives its name from the fact that the pattern is invested, or surrounded, with a refractory material. The wax patterns require extreme care for they are not strong enough to withstand forces encountered during the mold making. One advantage of investment casting is that the wax can be reused.
The process is suitable for repeatable production of net shape components from a variety of different metals and high performance alloys. Although generally used for small castings, this process has been used to produce complete aircraft door frames, with steel castings of up to 300 kg and aluminium castings of up to 30 kg. Compared to other casting processes such as die casting or sand casting, it can be an expensive process. However, the components that can be produced using investment casting can incorporate intricate contours, and in most cases the components are cast near net shape, so require little or no rework once cast.
Waste molding of plaster
A durable plaster intermediate is often used as a stage toward the production of a bronze sculpture or as a pointing guide for the creation of a carved stone. With the completion of a plaster, the work is more durable (if stored indoors) than a clay original which must be kept moist to avoid cracking. With the low cost plaster at hand, the expensive work of bronze casting or stone carving may be deferred until a patron is found, and as such work is considered to be a technical, rather than artistic process, it may even be deferred beyond the lifetime of the artist.
A waste mold is a negative mold that is destroyed during the process of removing it from the positive cast. In the creation of a plaster waste mold, thin layers of plaster are applied over the original clay sculpture. The first layer is colored to mark the end of the mold and the beginning of the cast. When cured, it is removed from the damp clay, incidentally destroying the fine details in undercuts present in the clay, but which are now captured in the mold. The mold may then at any later time (but only once) be used to cast a plaster positive image, identical to the original clay. This cast is commonly called "original plaster" as it is the first and only copy of the original clay sculpture. The surface of the original plaster may be further refined and may be painted and waxed to resemble a finished bronze casting.
Evaporative-pattern casting
This is a class of casting processes that use pattern materials that evaporate during the pour, which means there is no need to remove the pattern material from the mold before casting. The two main processes are lost-foam casting and full-mold casting.
Lost-foam casting
Lost-foam casting is a type of evaporative-pattern casting process that is similar to investment casting except foam is used for the pattern instead of wax. This process takes advantage of the low boiling point of foam to simplify the investment casting process by removing the need to melt the wax out of the mold.
Full-mold casting
Full-mold casting is an evaporative-pattern casting process which is a combination of sand casting and lost-foam casting. It uses an expanded polystyrene foam pattern which is then surrounded by sand, much like sand casting. The metal is then poured directly into the mold, which vaporizes the foam upon contact.
Non-expendable mold casting
Non-expendable mold casting differs from expendable processes in that the mold need not be reformed after each production cycle. This technique includes at least four different methods: permanent, die, centrifugal, and continuous casting. This form of casting also results in improved repeatability in parts produced and delivers near net shape results.
Permanent mold casting
Permanent mold casting is a metal casting process that employs reusable molds ("permanent molds"), usually made from metal. The most common process uses gravity to fill the mold. However, gas pressure or a vacuum are also used. A variation on the typical gravity casting process, called slush casting, produces hollow castings. Common casting metals are aluminum, magnesium, and copper alloys. Other materials include tin, zinc, and lead alloys and iron and steel are also cast in graphite molds. Permanent molds, while lasting more than one casting still have a limited life before wearing out.
Die casting
The die casting process forces molten metal under high pressure into mold cavities (which are machined into dies). Most die castings are made from nonferrous metals, specifically zinc, copper, and aluminium-based alloys, but ferrous metal die castings are possible. The die casting method is especially suited for applications where many small to medium-sized parts are needed with good detail, a fine surface quality and dimensional consistency.
Semi-solid metal casting
Semi-solid metal (SSM) casting is a modified die casting process that reduces or eliminates the residual porosity present in most die castings. Rather than using liquid metal as the feed material, SSM casting uses a higher viscosity feed material that is partially solid and partially liquid. A modified die casting machine is used to inject the semi-solid slurry into reusable hardened steel dies. The high viscosity of the semi-solid metal, along with the use of controlled die filling conditions, ensures that the semi-solid metal fills the die in a non-turbulent manner so that harmful porosity can be essentially eliminated.
Used commercially mainly for aluminium and magnesium alloys, SSM castings can be heat treated to the T4, T5 or T6 tempers. The combination of heat treatment, fast cooling rates (from using uncoated steel dies) and minimal porosity provides excellent combinations of strength and ductility. Other advantages of SSM casting include the ability to produce complex shaped parts net shape, pressure tightness, tight dimensional tolerances and the ability to cast thin walls.
Centrifugal casting
In this process molten metal is poured in the mold and allowed to solidify while the mold is rotating. Metal is poured into the center of the mold at its axis of rotation. Due to inertial force, the liquid metal is thrown out toward the periphery.
Centrifugal casting is both gravity and pressure independent since it creates its own force feed using a temporary sand mold held in a spinning chamber. Lead time varies with the application. Semi- and true-centrifugal processing permit 30–50 pieces/hr-mold to be produced, with a practical limit for batch processing of approximately 9000 kg total mass with a typical per-item limit of 2.3–4.5 kg.
Industrially, the centrifugal casting of railway wheels was an early application of the method developed by the German industrial company Krupp and this capability enabled the rapid growth of the enterprise.
Small art pieces such as jewelry are often cast by this method using the lost wax process, as the forces enable the rather viscous liquid metals to flow through very small passages and into fine details such as leaves and petals. This effect is similar to the benefits from vacuum casting, also applied to jewelry casting.
Continuous casting
Continuous casting is a refinement of the casting process for the continuous, high-volume production of metal sections with a constant cross-section. It's primarily used to produce a semi-finished products for further processing. Molten metal is poured into an open-ended, water-cooled mold, which allows a 'skin' of solid metal to form over the still-liquid center, gradually solidifying the metal from the outside in. After solidification, the strand, as it is sometimes called, is continuously withdrawn from the mold. Predetermined lengths of the strand can be cut off by either mechanical shears or traveling oxyacetylene torches and transferred to further forming processes, or to a stockpile. Cast sizes can range from strip (a few millimeters thick by about five meters wide) to billets (90 to 160 mm square) to slabs (1.25 m wide by 230 mm thick). Sometimes, the strand may undergo an initial hot rolling process before being cut.
Continuous casting is used due to the lower costs associated with continuous production of a standard product, and also increased quality of the final product. Metals such as steel, copper, aluminum and lead are continuously cast, with steel being the metal with the greatest tonnages cast using this method.
Upcasting
The upcasting (up-casting, upstream, or upward casting) is a method of either vertical or horizontal continuous casting of rods and pipes of various profiles (cylindrical, square, hexagonal, slabs etc.) of 8-30mm in diameter. Copper (Cu), bronze (Cu·Sn alloy), nickel alloys are usually used because of greater casting speed (in case of vertical upcasting) and because of better physical features obtained. The advantage of this method is that metals are almost oxygen-free and that the rate of product crystallization (solidification) may be adjusted in a crystallizer - a high-temperature resistant device that cools a growing metal rod or pipe by using water.
The method is comparable to Czochralski method of growing silicon (Si) crystals, which is a metalloid.
Terminology
Metal casting processes uses the following terminology:
Pattern: An approximate duplicate of the final casting used to form the mold cavity.
Molding material: The material that is packed around the pattern and then the pattern is removed to leave the cavity where the casting material will be poured.
Flask: The rigid wood or metal frame that holds the molding material.
Cope: The top half of the pattern, flask, mold, or core.
Drag: The bottom half of the pattern, flask, mold, or core.
Core: An insert in the mold that produces internal features in the casting, such as holes.
Core print: The region added to the pattern, core, or mold used to locate and support the core.
Mold cavity: The combined open area of the molding material and core, where the metal is poured to produce the casting.
Riser: An extra void in the mold that fills with molten material to compensate for shrinkage during solidification.
Gating system: The network of connected channels that deliver the molten material to the mold cavities.
Pouring cup or pouring basin: The part of the gating system that receives the molten material from the pouring vessel.
Sprue: The pouring cup attaches to the sprue, which is the vertical part of the gating system. The other end of the sprue attaches to the runners.
Runners: The horizontal portion of the gating system that connects the sprues to the gates.
Gates: The controlled entrances from the runners into the mold cavities.
Vents: Additional channels that provide an escape for gases generated during the pour.
Parting line or parting surface: The interface between the cope and drag halves of the mold, flask, or pattern.
Draft: The taper on the casting or pattern that allow it to be withdrawn from the mold
Core box: The mold or die used to produce the cores.
Chaplet: Long vertical holding rod for core that after casting it become the integral part of casting, provide the support to the core.
Some specialized processes, such as die casting, use additional terminology.
Theory
Casting is a solidification process, which means the solidification phenomenon controls most of the properties of the casting. Moreover, most of the casting defects occur during solidification, such as gas porosity and solidification shrinkage.
Solidification occurs in two steps: nucleation and crystal growth. In the nucleation stage, solid particles form within the liquid. When these particles form, their internal energy is lower than the surrounded liquid, which creates an energy interface between the two. The formation of the surface at this interface requires energy, so as nucleation occurs, the material actually undercools (i.e. cools below its solidification temperature) because of the extra energy required to form the interface surfaces. It then recalescences, or heats back up to its solidification temperature, for the crystal growth stage. Nucleation occurs on a pre-existing solid surface because not as much energy is required for a partial interface surface as for a complete spherical interface surface. This can be advantageous because fine-grained castings possess better properties than coarse-grained castings. A fine grain structure can be induced by grain refinement or inoculation, which is the process of adding impurities to induce nucleation.
All of the nucleations represent a crystal, which grows as the heat of fusion is extracted from the liquid until there is no liquid left. The direction, rate, and type of growth can be controlled to maximize the properties of the casting. Directional solidification is when the material solidifies at one end and proceeds to solidify to the other end; this is the most ideal type of grain growth because it allows liquid material to compensate for shrinkage.
Cooling curves
Cooling curves are important in controlling the quality of a casting. The most important part of the cooling curve is the cooling rate which affects the microstructure and properties. Generally speaking, an area of the casting which is cooled quickly will have a fine grain structure and an area which cools slowly will have a coarse grain structure. Below is an example cooling curve of a pure metal or eutectic alloy, with defining terminology.
Before the thermal arrest the material is a liquid and after it the material is a solid; during the thermal arrest the material is converting from a liquid to a solid. Also, the greater the superheat the more time there is for the liquid material to flow into intricate details.
The above cooling curve depicts a basic situation with a pure metal, however, most castings are of alloys, which have a cooling curve shaped as shown below.
There is no longer a thermal arrest, instead there is a freezing range. The freezing range corresponds directly to the liquidus and solidus found on the phase diagram for the specific alloy.
Chvorinov's rule
The local solidification time can be calculated using Chvorinov's rule, which is:
t
B
(
V
A
)
n
{\displaystyle t=B\left({\frac {V}{A}}\right)^{n}}
Where t is the solidification time, V is the volume of the casting, A is the surface area of the casting that contacts the mold, n is a constant, and B is the mold constant. It is most useful in determining if a riser will solidify before the casting, because if the riser does solidify first then it is worthless.
The gating system
The gating system serves many purposes, the most important being conveying the liquid material to the mold, but also controlling shrinkage, the speed of the liquid, turbulence, and trapping dross. The gates are usually attached to the thickest part of the casting to assist in controlling shrinkage. In especially large castings multiple gates or runners may be required to introduce metal to more than one point in the mold cavity. The speed of the material is important because if the material is traveling too slowly it can cool before completely filling, leading to misruns and cold shuts. If the material is moving too fast then the liquid material can erode the mold and contaminate the final casting. The shape and length of the gating system can also control how quickly the material cools; short round or square channels minimize heat loss.
The gating system may be designed to minimize turbulence, depending on the material being cast. For example, steel, cast iron, and most copper alloys are turbulent insensitive, but aluminium and magnesium alloys are turbulent sensitive. The turbulent insensitive materials usually have a short and open gating system to fill the mold as quickly as possible. However, for turbulent sensitive materials short sprues are used to minimize the distance the material must fall when entering the mold. Rectangular pouring cups and tapered sprues are used to prevent the formation of a vortex as the material flows into the mold; these vortices tend to suck gas and oxides into the mold. A large sprue well is used to dissipate the kinetic energy of the liquid material as it falls down the sprue, decreasing turbulence. The choke, which is the smallest cross-sectional area in the gating system used to control flow, can be placed near the sprue well to slow down and smooth out the flow. On some molds the choke is still placed on the gates to make separation of the part easier, but induces extreme turbulence. The gates are usually attached to the bottom of the casting to minimize turbulence and splashing.
The gating system may also be designed to trap dross. One method is to take advantage of the fact that some dross has a lower density than the base material so it floats to the top of the gating system. Therefore, long flat runners with gates that exit from the bottom of the runners can trap dross in the runners; long flat runners will cool the material more rapidly than round or square runners. For materials where the dross is a similar density to the base material, such as aluminium, runner extensions and runner wells can be advantageous. These take advantage of the fact that the dross is usually located at the beginning of the pour, therefore the runner is extended past the last gate(s) and the contaminates are contained in the wells. Screens or filters may also be used to trap contaminates.
It is important to keep the size of the gating system small, because it all must be cut from the casting and remelted to be reused. The efficiency, or yield, of a casting system can be calculated by dividing the weight of the casting by the weight of the metal poured. Therefore, the higher the number the more efficient the gating system/risers.
Shrinkage
There are three types of shrinkage: shrinkage of the liquid, solidification shrinkage and patternmaker's shrinkage. The shrinkage of the liquid is rarely a problem because more material is flowing into the mold behind it. Solidification shrinkage occurs because metals are less dense as a liquid than a solid, so during solidification the metal density dramatically increases. Patternmaker's shrinkage refers to the shrinkage that occurs when the material is cooled from the solidification temperature to room temperature, which occurs due to thermal contraction.
Solidification shrinkage
Most materials shrink as they solidify, but, as the adjacent table shows, a few materials do not, such as gray cast iron. For the materials that do shrink upon solidification the type of shrinkage depends on how wide the freezing range is for the material. For materials with a narrow freezing range, less than 50 °C (122 °F), a cavity, known as a pipe, forms in the center of the casting, because the outer shell freezes first and progressively solidifies to the center. Pure and eutectic metals usually have narrow solidification ranges. These materials tend to form a skin in open air molds, therefore they are known as skin forming alloys. For materials with a wide freezing range, greater than 110 °C (230 °F), much more of the casting occupies the mushy or slushy zone (the temperature range between the solidus and the liquidus), which leads to small pockets of liquid trapped throughout and ultimately porosity. These castings tend to have poor ductility, toughness, and fatigue resistance. Moreover, for these types of materials to be fluid-tight, a secondary operation is required to impregnate the casting with a lower melting point metal or resin.
For the materials that have narrow solidification ranges, pipes can be overcome by designing the casting to promote directional solidification, which means the casting freezes first at the point farthest from the gate, then progressively solidifies toward the gate. This allows a continuous feed of liquid material to be present at the point of solidification to compensate for the shrinkage. There is still a shrinkage void where the final material solidifies, but if designed properly, this will be in the gating system or riser.
Risers and riser aids
Risers, also known as feeders, are the most common way of providing directional solidification. It supplies liquid metal to the solidifying casting to compensate for solidification shrinkage. For a riser to work properly the riser must solidify after the casting, otherwise it cannot supply liquid metal to shrinkage within the casting. Risers add cost to the casting because it lowers the yield of each casting; i.e. more metal is lost as scrap for each casting. Another way to promote directional solidification is by adding chills to the mold. A chill is any material which will conduct heat away from the casting more rapidly than the material used for molding.
Risers are classified by three criteria. The first is if the riser is open to the atmosphere, if it is then it is called an open riser, otherwise it is known as a blind type. The second criterion is where the riser is located; if it is located on the casting then it is known as a top riser and if it is located next to the casting it is known as a side riser. Finally, if the riser is located on the gating system so that it fills after the molding cavity, it is known as a live riser or hot riser, but if the riser fills with materials that have already flowed through the molding cavity it is known as a dead riser or cold riser.
Riser aids are items used to assist risers in creating directional solidification or reducing the number of risers required. One of these items are chills which accelerate cooling in a certain part of the mold. There are two types: external and internal chills. External chills are masses of high-heat-capacity and high-thermal-conductivity material that are placed on an edge of the molding cavity. Internal chills are pieces of the same metal that is being poured, which are placed inside the mold cavity and become part of the casting. Insulating sleeves and toppings may also be installed around the riser cavity to slow the solidification of the riser. Heater coils may also be installed around or above the riser cavity to slow solidification.
Patternmaker's shrink
Shrinkage after solidification can be dealt with by using an oversized pattern designed specifically for the alloy used. Contraction rules, or shrink rules, are used to make the patterns oversized to compensate for this type of shrinkage. These rulers are up to 2.5% oversize, depending on the material being cast. These rulers are mainly referred to by their percentage change. A pattern made to match an existing part would be made as follows: First, the existing part would be measured using a standard ruler, then when constructing the pattern, the pattern maker would use a contraction rule, ensuring that the casting would contract to the correct size.
Patternmaker's shrinkage does not take phase change transformations into account. For example, eutectic reactions, martensitic reactions, and graphitization can cause expansions or contractions.
Mold cavity
The mold cavity of a casting does not reflect the exact dimensions of the finished part due to a number of reasons. These modifications to the mold cavity are known as allowances and account for patternmaker's shrinkage, draft, machining, and distortion. In non-expendable processes, these allowances are imparted directly into the permanent mold, but in expendable mold processes they are imparted into the patterns, which later form the mold cavity. For non-expendable molds an allowance is required for the dimensional change of the mold due to heating to operating temperatures.
For surfaces of the casting that are perpendicular to the parting line of the mold a draft must be included. This is so that the casting can be released in non-expendable processes or the pattern can be released from the mold without destroying the mold in expendable processes. The required draft angle depends on the size and shape of the feature, the depth of the mold cavity, how the part or pattern is being removed from the mold, the pattern or part material, the mold material, and the process type. Usually the draft is not less than 1%.
The machining allowance varies drastically from one process to another. Sand castings generally have a rough surface finish, therefore need a greater machining allowance, whereas die casting has a very fine surface finish, which may not need any machining tolerance. Also, the draft may provide enough of a machining allowance to begin with.
The distortion allowance is only necessary for certain geometries. For instance, U-shaped castings will tend to distort with the legs splaying outward, because the base of the shape can contract while the legs are constrained by the mold. This can be overcome by designing the mold cavity to slope the leg inward to begin with. Also, long horizontal sections tend to sag in the middle if ribs are not incorporated, so a distortion allowance may be required.
Cores may be used in expendable mold processes to produce internal features. The core can be of metal but it is usually done in sand.
Filling
There are a few common methods for filling the mold cavity: gravity, low-pressure, high-pressure, and vacuum.
Vacuum filling, also known as counter-gravity filling, is more metal efficient than gravity pouring because less material solidifies in the gating system. Gravity pouring only has a 15 to 50% metal yield as compared to 60 to 95% for vacuum pouring. There is also less turbulence, so the gating system can be simplified since it does not have to control turbulence. Plus, because the metal is drawn from below the top of the pool the metal is free from dross and slag, as these are lower density (lighter) and float to the top of the pool. The pressure differential helps the metal flow into every intricacy of the mold. Finally, lower temperatures can be used, which improves the grain structure. The first patented vacuum casting machine and process dates to 1879.
Low-pressure filling uses 5 to 15 psig (35 to 100 kPag) of air pressure to force liquid metal up a feed tube into the mold cavity. This eliminates turbulence found in gravity casting and increases density, repeatability, tolerances, and grain uniformity. After the casting has solidified the pressure is released and any remaining liquid returns to the crucible, which increases yield.
Tilt filling
Tilt filling, also known as tilt casting, is an uncommon filling technique where the crucible is attached to the gating system and both are slowly rotated so that the metal enters the mold cavity with little turbulence. The goal is to reduce porosity and inclusions by limiting turbulence. For most uses tilt filling is not feasible because the following inherent problem: if the system is rotated slow enough to not induce turbulence, the front of the metal stream begins to solidify, which results in mis-runs. If the system is rotated faster it induces turbulence, which defeats the purpose. Durville of France was the first to try tilt casting, in the 1800s. He tried to use it to reduce surface defects when casting coinage from aluminium bronze.
Macrostructure
The grain macrostructure in ingots and most castings have three distinct regions or zones: the chill zone, columnar zone, and equiaxed zone. The image below depicts these zones.
The chill zone is named so because it occurs at the walls of the mold where the wall chills the material. Here is where the nucleation phase of the solidification process takes place. As more heat is removed the grains grow towards the center of the casting. These are thin, long columns that are perpendicular to the casting surface, which are undesirable because they have anisotropic properties. Finally, in the center the equiaxed zone contains spherical, randomly oriented crystals. These are desirable because they have isotropic properties. The creation of this zone can be promoted by using a low pouring temperature, alloy inclusions, or inoculants.
Inspection
Common inspection methods for steel castings are magnetic particle testing and liquid penetrant testing. Common inspection methods for aluminum castings are radiography, ultrasonic testing, and liquid penetrant testing.
Defects
There are a number of problems that can be encountered during the casting process. The main types are: gas porosity, shrinkage defects, mold material defects, pouring metal defects, and metallurgical defects.
Casting process simulation
Casting processes simulation uses numerical methods to calculate cast component quality considering mold filling, solidification and cooling, and provides a quantitative prediction of casting mechanical properties, thermal stresses and distortion. Simulation accurately describes a cast component's quality up-front before production starts. The casting rigging can be designed with respect to the required component properties. This has benefits beyond a reduction in pre-production sampling, as the precise layout of the complete casting system also leads to energy, material, and tooling savings.
The software supports the user in component design, the determination of melting practice and casting methoding through to pattern and mold making, heat treatment, and finishing. This saves costs along the entire casting manufacturing route.
Casting process simulation was initially developed at universities starting from the early 1970s, mainly in Europe and in the U.S., and is regarded as the most important innovation in casting technology over the last 50 years. Since the late 1980s, commercial programs are available which make it possible for foundries to gain new insight into what is happening inside the mold or die during the casting process.

Metal clay is a medium consisting of microscopic particles of metal such as silver, gold, bronze, or copper mixed with an organic binder and water which creates a clay-like material for use in making jewelry, and other small metal objects. Originating in Japan in 1990, metal clay can be shaped like any soft clay, by hand or using molds. After drying, the clay can be carved, sculpted and finished before being fired in a variety of ways such as in a kiln, with a handheld butane torch, or on a gas stove - depending on the metal type contained in the clay. As the dry metal clay fires, binders burns away, and water content evaporates, resulting in sintered metal. Shrinkage of between 8% and 30% occurs (depending on the product used). Alloys such as bronze, sterling silver, and steel, as well as pure copper are also available.
History
Metal clay was developed in Japan in 1990 to allow craft jewelry makers in Japan to make sophisticated looking jewelry without the years of study needed to make fine jewelry. It made its way to the United States in the mid-90's, and was introduced by well-known metalsmith, Tim McCreight. In the ensuing years, metal clay has also become a popular addition to the traditional jewelry makers' tool box, thereby making its way into the mainstream.
Silver metal clay
Lump metal clay is sold in sealed packets to keep it moist and workable. Fine silver metal clay results in objects containing 99.9% pure silver, making it suitable for enameling. It is also available in fine gold, 'enriched' sterling (.950 and .960), traditional .925 sterling, copper, bronze, steel, and additional variations. The silver versions are also available as a softer paste in a pre-filled syringe which can be used to produce extruded forms, in small jars of slip and as paper-like sheets, from which most of the moisture has been removed. Gold metal clay is also available in paste form. The oldest brand of silver metal clay currently available is Art Clay Silver (ACS). The newest is Project X by ClayRevolution.com (CR).
An easily fireable sterling alloy, EZ960 Sterling Silver Metal Clay was invented by Bill Struve from Metal Adventures, the inventor of BRONZclay™ and COPPRclay™. Because this clay body (type) is an 'enriched' sterling silver alloy, among its best attributes are its ability to be fired in an 'open' kiln (no carbon needed), and in its post firing strength, in comparison to fine silver. Enriched sterling is fired open shelf on a raised kiln shelf up to 913 °C (1,675 °F) for up to 2 hours, full ramp. Its shrinkage rate can be smaller than other clays, at 10–11%. Note: Each brand and clay type has its own firing schedule and requirements. Differences in firing and shrinkage rates are due to the origin of the metal particles' shape and size, and potentially the binder used. Shrinkage is affected by how the microscopic particles fit together after sintering.
Precious Metal Clay (aka PMC)
PMC was the brand name of the first metal clay developed in the early 1990s in Japan by metallurgist Masaki Morikawa working for Mitsubishi Materials. As a solid-phase sintered product of a precious metal powder used to form a precious metal article, the material consisted of microscopic particles of pure silver, and a water-soluble, non-toxic, organic binder that burns off during firing. Success was first achieved with 24k gold and later duplicated with .999 silver.
The PMC brand included the following products:
The original formula of PMC, now called "standard": fired at 900 °C (1,650 °F) for 2 hours, shrinks by 30% during firing.
PMC+ & PMCflex: fired at 900 °C (1,650 °F) for 10 minutes or 800 °C (1,470 °F) for 30 minutes; shrinks 15%, due to a particle size reduction. PMC+ is also available in sheet form which can be worked like paper; for example, for origami.
PMC3: fired at 599 °C (1,110 °F) for 45 minutes or 699 °C (1,290 °F) for 10 minutes; shrinks by 10%. It can also be fired using a butane torch by heating it to orange heat for at least 2 minutes. It has a longer working life than the older formulations. It is also available in slip and paste forms which can be painted onto the surface of an object to be used as a mold.
Aura 22: a 22-carat gilding material, a gold paste intended to be painted onto the surface of silver PMC pieces, or ready-made silver objects.
PMC Pro: a harder product which is only 0.900 fineness silver, hence it cannot be hallmarked as sterling silver. It also requires kiln firing in a tub of activated carbon for 1 hour at 760 °C (1,400 °F).
PMC Sterling: is fired at 815 °C (1,499 °F) and shrinks by 10–20%. Because of the copper content in this formula, firing is a two-step process; step one is an open-shelf firing and step two requires a firing pan with activated carbon media.
Mitsubishi discontinued all PMC production in 2023.
Art Clay Silver (aka ACS)
ACS was developed by AIDA Chemical Industries, also a Japanese company. ACS followed PMC Standard with their Art Clay Original clay which also allows the user to fire with a handheld torch or on a gas hob. Owing to subtle differences in the binder and suggested firing times, this clay shrinks less than the PMC versions, approximately 8–10%.
Further developments introduced the Art Clay Slow Dry, a clay with a longer working time. Art Clay 650 and Art Clay 650 Slow Dry soon followed; both clays can be fired at 650 °C (1,202 °F), allowing the user to combine the clay with glass and sterling silver, which are affected negatively by the higher temperatures needed to fire the first generation clays. AIDA also manufacturers Oil Paste, a product used only on fired metal clay or milled fine silver, and Overlay Paste, which is designed for drawing designs on glass and porcelain.
In 2006 AIDA introduced the Art Clay Gold Paste, a more economical way to work with gold. The paste is painted onto the fired silver clay, then refired in a kiln, or with a torch or gas stove. When fired, it bonds with the silver, giving a 22-carat gold accent. The same year also saw Art Clay Slow Tarnish introduced, a clay that tarnishes less rapidly than the other metal clays.
Base metal clays
Lump metal clay in bronze was first developed by Bill Struve of Metal Adventures Inc. (MA) and introduced in 2008, followed soon after with a lump copper clay version. Due to the lower retail cost of base metal clays, bronze and copper may be used more often than gold and silver metal clay options by artists in the American market place. However, due to the specialized firing requirements of base metal clays, actual creation time is more labor intensive than that of their silver and gold counterparts. Base metal clays, such as bronze, copper, and steel are best fired in the absence of oxygen to eliminate the oxidation of the metal by atmospheric oxygen. A means to accomplish this by submerging the work in activated carbon, placed inside a suitable fire-proof container was discovered and developed by Bill Struve in conjunction with Hadar Jacobson.
Powders
Metal clay powders pre mixed with an organic binder are also available to the retail market to which the end use adds water and blends together create a mass with a clay-like consistency. One advantage to the powders is their unlimited shelf life. The first silver clay in powder form was released in 2006 as Silver Smiths' Metal Clay Powder. In the following years base metal clays by Hadar Jacobson and Goldie World released several variations containing copper, brass, and even steel.
Firing methods
Metal clay can be fired by a variety of methods. The two most common are:
Electric kiln - Kilns designed for metal clay are programmable and easy to use. All clay types can be fired by this method. This is the only way paper type and base metal clays can be fired.
Torch - Any type of hand-held torch will work as long as it is hot enough to sinter the metal, but butane is the most common type of gas used for this purpose. The color determines firing time.
Many users also prefer to use a gas stove top/hob. Either natural or bottled gas can be used, provided it reaches the temperature necessary to sinter. The color of the piece determines the firing time.

Metallurgy is a domain of materials science and engineering that studies the physical and chemical behavior of metallic elements, their inter-metallic compounds, and their mixtures, which are known as alloys.
Metallurgy encompasses both the science and the technology of metals, including their production and the engineering of metal components used in products for both consumers and manufacturers. Metallurgy is distinct from the craft of metalworking by providing it with a scientific foundation, much as medical science supports the practice of medicine. A specialist practitioner of metallurgy is known as a metallurgist.
The science of metallurgy is further subdivided into two broad categories: chemical metallurgy and physical metallurgy. Chemical metallurgy is chiefly concerned with the reduction and oxidation of metals, and the chemical performance of metals. Subjects of study in chemical metallurgy include mineral processing, the extraction of metals, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and chemical degradation (corrosion). In contrast, physical metallurgy focuses on the mechanical properties of metals, the physical properties of metals, and the physical performance of metals. Topics studied in physical metallurgy include crystallography, material characterization, mechanical metallurgy, phase transformations, and failure mechanisms.
Historically, metallurgy has predominantly focused on the production of metals. Metal production begins with the processing of ores to extract the metal, and includes the mixture of metals to make alloys. Metal alloys are often a blend of two or more metallic elements. However, non-metallic elements are often added to alloys in order to achieve properties suitable for an application. The study of metal production is subdivided into ferrous metallurgy (also known as black metallurgy) and non-ferrous metallurgy, also known as colored metallurgy.
Ferrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on iron, while non-ferrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on other metals. The production of ferrous metals accounts for 95% of world metal production.
Modern metallurgists work in both emerging and traditional areas as part of an interdisciplinary team alongside material scientists and other engineers. Some traditional areas include mineral processing, metal production, heat treatment, failure analysis, and the joining of metals (including welding, brazing, and soldering). Emerging areas for metallurgists include nanotechnology, superconductors, composites, biomedical materials, electronic materials (semiconductors) and surface engineering.
Etymology and pronunciation
Metallurgy derives from the Ancient Greek μεταλλουργός, metallourgós, "worker in metal", from μέταλλον, métallon, "mine, metal" + ἔργον, érgon, "work" The word was originally an alchemist's term for the extraction of metals from minerals, the ending -urgy signifying a process, especially manufacturing; it was discussed in this sense in the 1797 Encyclopædia Britannica.
In the late 19th century, metallurgy's definition was extended to the more general scientific study of metals, alloys, and related processes. In English, the pronunciation is the more common one in the United Kingdom while pronunciation is the more common one in the United States and is the first-listed variant in various American dictionaries, including Merriam-Webster Collegiate and American Heritage.
History
The earliest metal employed by humans appears to be gold, which can be found "native". Small amounts of natural gold, dating to the late Paleolithic period, 40,000 BCE, have been found in Spanish caves. Silver, copper, tin and meteoric iron can also be found in native form, allowing a limited amount of metalworking in early cultures. Early cold metallurgy, using native copper that was not smelted from ore has been documented at sites in Anatolia and at the site of Tell Maghzaliyah in Iraq, dating from the 7th~6th millennia BCE.
The earliest archaeological support of smelting (hot metallurgy) in Eurasia is found in the Balkans and Carpathian Mountains, as evidenced by findings of objects made by metal casting and smelting dated to around 6,200 ~ 5,000 BCE, with the invention of copper metallurgy. Certain metals, such as tin, lead, and copper can be recovered from their ores by simply heating the rocks in a comparatively moderate-temperature fire or blast furnace in a process known as smelting. The first evidence of copper smelting, dating from the 6th millennium BCE, has been found at archaeological sites in Majdanpek, Jarmovac, and Pločnik, in present-day Serbia. The site of Pločnik has produced a smelted copper axe dating from 5,500 BCE, belonging to the Vinča culture. The Balkans and adjacent Carpathian region were the location of major Chalcolithic cultures including Vinča, Varna, Karanovo, Gumelnița and Hamangia, which are often grouped together under the name of 'Old Europe'. With the Carpatho-Balkan region described as the 'earliest metallurgical province in Eurasia', its scale and technical quality of metal production in the 6th~5th millennia BCE totally overshadowed that of any other contemporary production centre.
The earliest documented use of lead (possibly native or smelted) in the Near East dates from the 6th millennium BCE, is from the late Neolithic settlements of Yarim Tepe and Arpachiyah in Iraq. The artifacts suggest that lead smelting may have predated copper smelting. Metallurgy of lead has also been found in the Balkans during the same period.
Copper smelting is documented at sites in Anatolia and at the site of Tal-i Iblis in southeastern Iran from c. 5,000 BCE.
Copper smelting is first documented in the Delta region of northern Egypt in c. 4,000 BCE, associated with the Maadi culture. This represents the earliest evidence for smelting in Africa.
The Varna Necropolis, Bulgaria, is a burial site located in the western industrial zone of Varna, approximately 4 km from the city centre, internationally considered one of the key archaeological sites in world prehistory. The oldest gold treasure in the world, dating from 4,600 BC – 4,200 BCE, was discovered at Varna. The gold piece dating from 4,500 BCE, found in 2019 in Durankulak, near Varna is another important example. Other signs of early metals are found from the 3rd millennium BCE in Palmela, Portugal, Los Millares, Spain, and Stonehenge, United Kingdom. The precise beginnings, however, have not been clearly ascertained and new discoveries are both continuous and ongoing.
In approximately 1,900 BCE, ancient iron smelting sites existed in Tamil Nadu.
In the Near East, about 3,500 BCE, it was discovered that the superior metal bronze could be made by combining copper and tin. This represented a major technological shift known as the Bronze Age.
The extraction of iron from its ore into a workable metal is much more difficult than for copper or tin. The process appears to have been invented by the Hittites in about 1,200 BCE, beginning the Iron Age. The ability to extract and work iron was a key factor in the success of the Philistines.
Historical developments in ferrous metallurgy can be found in a wide variety of past cultures and civilizations. This includes the ancient and medieval kingdoms and empires of the Middle East and Near East, ancient Iran, ancient Egypt, ancient Nubia, and Anatolia in present-day Turkey, Ancient Nok, Carthage, the Celts, Greeks and Romans of ancient Europe, medieval Europe, ancient and medieval China, ancient and medieval India, ancient and medieval Japan, amongst others.
Wootz process was developed and practiced in the Indian subcontinent as early as 300 BCE—although certainly by 200 BCE—high quality steel was being produced in southern India, by what Europeans would later call the crucible technique. Golconda steel, also called Wootz steel is an ultra-high carbon steel, with a natural inclusion of carbide forming Vanadium (~0.005%), resulting in the formation of nanomaterials in its microstructure and characterised by exhibiting properties such as superplasticity and high impact hardness. Archaeological and Tamil language literary evidence suggests that this manufacturing process was already in existence in South India well before the common era, with wootz steel exported from the Chera dynasty and called Seric Iron in Rome, and later known as Damascus steel in Europe. Reproduction research undertaken by Prof. J.D Verhoeven and Al Pendray identified the role of impurities within the local ore, in carbide formation, and repeated thermal cycling of blades, in the pattern creation, and reproduced Wootz steel blades with patterns microscopically and visually identical to ancient blade patterns.
A 16th century book by Georg Agricola, De re metallica, describes the highly developed and complex processes of mining metal ores, metal extraction, and metallurgy of the time. Agricola has been described as the "father of metallurgy".
Extraction
Extractive metallurgy is the practice of removing valuable metals from an ore and refining the extracted raw metals into a purer form. In order to convert a metal oxide or sulphide to a purer metal, the ore must be reduced physically, chemically, or electrolytically. Extractive metallurgists are interested in three primary streams: feed, concentrate (metal oxide/sulphide) and tailings (waste).
After mining, large pieces of the ore feed are broken through crushing or grinding in order to obtain particles small enough, where each particle is either mostly valuable or mostly waste. Concentrating the particles of value in a form supporting separation enables the desired metal to be removed from waste products.
Mining may not be necessary, if the ore body and physical environment are conducive to leaching. Leaching dissolves minerals in an ore body and results in an enriched solution. The solution is collected and processed to extract valuable metals. Ore bodies often contain more than one valuable metal.
Tailings of a previous process may be used as a feed in another process to extract a secondary product from the original ore. Additionally, a concentrate may contain more than one valuable metal. That concentrate would then be processed to separate the valuable metals into individual constituents.
Metal and its alloys
Much effort has been placed on understanding the iron–carbon alloy system, which includes steels and cast irons. Plain carbon steels (those that contain essentially only carbon as an alloying element) are used in low-cost, high-strength applications, where neither weight nor corrosion are a major concern. Cast irons, including ductile iron, are also part of the iron-carbon system. Iron-Manganese-Chromium alloys (Hadfield-type steels) are also used in non-magnetic applications such as directional drilling.
Other engineering metals include aluminium, chromium, copper, magnesium, nickel, titanium, zinc, and silicon. These metals are most often used as alloys with the noted exception of silicon, which is not a metal. Other forms include:
Stainless steel, particularly Austenitic stainless steels, galvanized steel, nickel alloys, titanium alloys, or occasionally copper alloys are used where resistance to corrosion is important.
Aluminium alloys and magnesium alloys are commonly used when a lightweight strong part is required such as in automotive and aerospace applications.
Copper-nickel alloys (such as Monel) are used in highly corrosive environments and for non-magnetic applications.
Nickel-based superalloys like Inconel are used in high-temperature applications such as gas turbines, turbochargers, pressure vessels, and heat exchangers.
For extremely high temperatures, single crystal alloys are used to minimize creep. In modern electronics, high purity single crystal silicon is essential for metal-oxide-silicon transistors (MOS) and integrated circuits.
Production
In production engineering, metallurgy is concerned with the production of metallic components for use in consumer or engineering products. This involves production of alloys, shaping, heat treatment and surface treatment of product. The metallurgist's task is to achieve balance between material properties, such as cost, weight, strength, toughness, hardness, corrosion, fatigue resistance and performance in temperature extremes. To achieve this goal, the operating environment must be carefully considered.
Hardness testing (using scales such as Rockwell, Vickers, and Brinell) is a common practice for characterizing a metal's elasticity and plasticity In a saltwater environment, most ferrous metals and some non-ferrous alloys corrode quickly. Metals exposed to cold or cryogenic conditions may undergo a ductile to brittle transition and lose their toughness, becoming more brittle and prone to cracking. Metals under continual cyclic loading can suffer from metal fatigue. Metals under constant stress at elevated temperatures can creep.
Metalworking processes
Casting – molten metal is poured into a shaped mold. Variants of casting include sand casting, investment casting, also called the lost wax process, die casting, centrifugal casting, both vertical and horizontal, and continuous castings. Each of these forms has advantages for certain metals and applications considering factors like magnetism and corrosion.
Forging – a red-hot billet is hammered into shape.
Rolling – a billet is passed through successively narrower rollers to create a sheet.
Extrusion – a hot and malleable metal is forced under pressure through a die, which shapes it before it cools.
Machining – lathes, milling machines and drills cut the cold metal to shape.
Sintering – a powdered metal is heated in a non-oxidizing environment after being compressed into a die.
Fabrication – sheets of metal are cut with guillotines or gas cutters and bent and welded into structural shape.
Laser cladding – metallic powder is blown through a movable laser beam (e.g. mounted on a NC 5-axis machine). The resulting melted metal reaches a substrate to form a melt pool. By moving the laser head, it is possible to stack the tracks and build up a three-dimensional piece.
3D printing – Sintering or melting amorphous powder metal in a 3D space to make any object to shape.
Cold-working processes, in which the product's shape is altered by rolling, fabrication or other processes, while the product is cold, can increase the strength of the product by a process called work hardening. Work hardening creates microscopic defects in the metal, which resist further changes of shape.
Heat treatment
Metals can be heat-treated to alter the properties of strength, ductility, toughness, hardness and resistance to corrosion. Common heat treatment processes include annealing, precipitation strengthening, quenching, and tempering:
Annealing process softens the metal by heating it and then allowing it to cool very slowly, which gets rid of stresses in the metal and makes the grain structure large and soft-edged so that, when the metal is hit or stressed it dents or perhaps bends, rather than breaking; it is also easier to sand, grind, or cut annealed metal.
Quenching is the process of cooling metal very quickly after heating, thus "freezing" the metal's molecules in the very hard martensite form, which makes the metal harder.
Tempering relieves stresses in the metal that were caused by the hardening process; tempering makes the metal less hard while making it better able to sustain impacts without breaking.
Often, mechanical and thermal treatments are combined in what are known as thermo-mechanical treatments for better properties and more efficient processing of materials. These processes are common to high-alloy special steels, superalloys and titanium alloys.
Plating
Electroplating is a chemical surface-treatment technique. It involves bonding a thin layer of another metal such as gold, silver, chromium or zinc to the surface of the product. This is done by selecting the coating material electrolyte solution, which is the material that is going to coat the workpiece (gold, silver, zinc). There needs to be two electrodes of different materials: one the same material as the coating material and one that is receiving the coating material. Two electrodes are electrically charged and the coating material is stuck to the work piece. It is used to reduce corrosion as well as to improve the product's aesthetic appearance. It is also used to make inexpensive metals look like the more expensive ones (gold, silver).
Shot peening
Shot peening is a cold working process used to finish metal parts. In the process of shot peening, small round shot is blasted against the surface of the part to be finished. This process is used to prolong the product life of the part, prevent stress corrosion failures, and also prevent fatigue. The shot leaves small dimples on the surface like a peen hammer does, which cause compression stress under the dimple. As the shot media strikes the material over and over, it forms many overlapping dimples throughout the piece being treated. The compression stress in the surface of the material strengthens the part and makes it more resistant to fatigue failure, stress failures, corrosion failure, and cracking.
Thermal spraying
Thermal spraying techniques are another popular finishing option, and often have better high temperature properties than electroplated coatings. Thermal spraying, also known as a spray welding process, is an industrial coating process that consists of a heat source (flame or other) and a coating material; the coating can be in a powder or wire form, either of which is melted and then sprayed at a high velocity onto the surface of the material being treated. The spray treating process is known by many different names such as HVOF (high velocity oxygen fuel), plasma spray, flame spray, arc spray and metalizing.
Electroless deposition
Electroless deposition (ED) or electroless plating is defined as the autocatalytic process, through which metals and metal alloys are deposited onto nonconductive surfaces. These nonconductive surfaces include plastics, ceramics, glass, etc., which can then become decorative, anti-corrosive, and conductive, depending on the method of deposition and the designed use. Electroless deposition is a chemical processes that create metal coatings on various materials by autocatalytic chemical reduction of metal cations in a liquid bath.
Characterization
Metallurgists study the microscopic and macroscopic structure of metals using metallography, a technique invented by Henry Clifton Sorby.
In metallography, an alloy of interest is ground flat and polished to a mirror finish. The sample can then be etched to reveal the microstructure and macrostructure of the metal. The sample is then examined in an optical or electron microscope, and the image contrast provides details on the composition, mechanical properties, and processing history.
Crystallography, often using diffraction of X-rays or electrons, is another valuable tool available to the modern metallurgist. Crystallography allows identification of unknown materials and reveals the crystal structure of the sample. Quantitative crystallography can be used to calculate the amount of phases present as well as the degree of strain to which a sample has been subjected.
Current advanced characterization techniques, which are used frequently in this field are: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and atom-probe tomography (APT).

Mine safety is a broad term referring to the practice of controlling and managing a wide range of hazards associated with the life cycle of mining-related activities. Mine safety practice involves the implementation of recognised hazard controls and/or reduction of risks associated with mining activities to legally, socially and morally acceptable levels. While the fundamental principle of mine safety is to remove health and safety risks to mine workers, mining safety practice may also focus on the reduction of risks to plant (machinery) together with the structure and orebody of the mine.
Safety has long been a concern in the mining business, especially in underground mining. The Courrières mine disaster, Europe's worst mining accident, involved the death of 1,099 miners in Northern France on March 10, 1906. This disaster was surpassed only by the Benxihu Colliery accident in China on April 26, 1942, which killed 1,549 miners. While mining today is substantially safer than it was in previous decades, mining accidents still occur. Government figures from China indicate that 5,000 Chinese miners die in accidents each year, while other reports have suggested a figure as high as 20,000. Mining accidents continue worldwide, including accidents causing dozens of fatalities at a time such as the 2007 Ulyanovskaya Mine disaster in Russia, the 2009 Heilongjiang mine explosion in China, and the 2010 Upper Big Branch Mine disaster in the United States.
Hazards and prevention
Ventilation
Mining ventilation is a significant safety concern for many miners. Poor ventilation inside sub-surface mines causes exposure to harmful gases, heat, and dust, which can cause illness, injury, and death. The concentration of methane and other airborne contaminants underground can generally be controlled by dilution (ventilation), capture before entering the host air stream (methane drainage), or isolation (seals and stoppings). A ventilation system is set up to force a stream of air through the working areas of the mine. The air circulation necessary for effective ventilation of a mine is generated by one or more large mine fans, usually located above ground. Air flows in one direction only, making circuits through the mine such that each main work area constantly receives a supply of fresh air. Watering down in coal mines also helps to keep dust levels down: by spraying the machine with water and filtering the dust-laden water with a scrubber fan, miners can successfully trap the dust.
Gases in mines can poison the workers or displace the oxygen in the mine, causing asphyxiation. For this reason, the U.S. Mine Safety and Health Administration requires that groups of miners in the United States carry gas detection equipment that can detect common gases, such as CO, O2, H2S, CH4, as well as calculate % Lower Explosive Limit. Regulation requires that all production stop if there is a concentration of 1.4% of flammable gas present. Additionally, further regulation is being requested for more gas detection as newer technology such as nanotechnology is introduced.
Gas ignition
Ignited methane gas is a common source of explosions in coal mines, which in turn can initiate more extensive coal dust explosions. For this reason, rock dusts such as limestone dust are spread throughout coal mines to diminish the chances of coal dust explosions as well as to limit the extent of potential explosions, in a process known as rock dusting. Coal dust explosions can also begin independently of methane gas explosions. Frictional heat and sparks generated by mining equipment can ignite both methane gas and coal dust. For this reason, water is often used to cool rock-cutting sites.
Noise
Miners utilize equipment strong enough to break through extremely hard layers of the Earth's crust. This equipment, combined with the closed work space in which underground miners work, can cause hearing loss. For example, a roof bolter (commonly used by mine roof bolter operators) can reach sound power levels of up to 115 dB. Combined with the reverberant effects of underground mines, a miner without proper hearing protection is at a high risk for hearing loss. By age 50, nearly 90% of U.S. coal miners have some hearing loss, compared to only 10% among workers not exposed to loud noises. Roof bolters are among the loudest machines, but auger miners, bulldozers, continuous mining machines, front end loaders, and shuttle cars and trucks are also among those machines most responsible for excessive noise in mine work.
The preferred prevention strategy involves engineering controls to eliminate noise sources. Administrative controls and hearing protection can also be used when engineering controls are not feasible.
Cave-ins and rock falls
Since mining entails removing dirt and rock from its natural location, thereby creating large empty pits, rooms, and tunnels, cave-ins as well as ground and rock falls are a major concern within mines. Modern techniques for timbering and bracing walls and ceilings within sub-surface mines have reduced the number of fatalities due to cave-ins, but ground falls continue to represent up to 50% of mining fatalities. Even in cases where mine collapses are not instantly fatal, they can trap mine workers deep underground. Cases such as these often lead to high-profile rescue efforts, such as when 33 Chilean miners were trapped deep underground for 69 days in 2010.
Heat exposure
High temperatures and humidity may result in heat-related illnesses, including heat stroke, which can be fatal. The presence of heavy equipment in confined spaces also poses a risk to miners. To improve the safety of mine workers, modern mines use automation and remote operation including, for example, such equipment as automated loaders and remotely operated rockbreakers. However, despite modern improvements to safety practices, mining remains a dangerous occupation throughout the world.
Use of explosives
Explosives are used in mines for constructive purposes, but can be hazardous if proper safety measures are not taken. For example, flyrock can be ejected beyond the blast site, causing personal injuries and damage to property.
Dust exposure
In coal mining, the extraction, crushing, and transport of coal can generate significant amounts of airborne respirable (extremely fine) coal dust. Dust less than 10 microns in size cannot be seen with the eye. In non-coal mining, stone, and sand and gravel mining operations and for particular occupations in coal mines, the respirable silica dust created during mining is the primary concern. Respirable dust can cause long-term lung problems. Respirable coal dust can cause coal workers' pneumoconiosis (also known as miners lung or black lung disease), respirable silica dust can cause silicosis, lung cancer, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Elongate mineral particles can lead to asbestosis, lung cancer, and mesothelioma.
Abandoned mines
There are upwards of 560,000 abandoned mines on public and privately owned lands in the United States alone. Abandoned mines may be dangerous to anyone who attempts to explore them without proper knowledge and safety training.
Regulations
In the United States, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) develops and enforces regulations to ensure mining safety. Additionally, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) researches occupational health issues related to mining, which is a priority industry sector in the National Occupational Research Agenda (NORA). Several organizations impose self-assessments in efforts to ensure the safety of individual workers in compliance with these regulations; the Neil George Safety System was among the first of these programs established in the mining industry.

A miner is a person who extracts ore, coal, chalk, clay, or other minerals from the earth through mining. There are two senses in which the term is used. In its narrowest sense, a miner is someone who works at the rock face; cutting, blasting, or otherwise working and removing the rock. In a broader sense, a "miner" is anyone working within a mine, not just a worker at the rock face.
Cave-ins, explosions, toxic air, and extreme temperatures are some of the most dangerous mining accidents. The overall long-term health effects of underground mining conditions is also a hazard. In some countries, miners lack social guarantees and in case of injury may be left to cope without assistance.
In regions with a long mining tradition, many communities have developed cultural traditions and aspects specific to the various regions, in the forms of particular equipment, symbolism, music, and the like.
Roles
Different functions of the individual miner. Many of the roles are specific to a type of mining, such as coal mining.
Roles considered to be "miners" in the narrower sense have included:
Hewer (also known as "cake" or "pickman"), whose job was to hew the rock.
Collier, a hewer who hews coal with a pick.
Driller, who works a rock drill to bore holes for placing dynamite or other explosives.
Other roles within mines that did not involve breaking rock (and thus fit the broader definition) have included:
Loader (also called a "bandsman"), who loads the mining carts with coal at the arm.
Putter (also known as a "drags-man"), who works the carts around the mine.
Barrow-man, who transported the broken coal from the face in wheelbarrows.
Hurrier, who transported coal carts from a mine to the surface.
Timbers, who fashions and installs timber supports to support the walls and ceiling in an underground mine.
In addition to miners working in the seam, a mine employs other workers in duties in the sea. In addition to the office staff of various sorts, these may include:
Brakesman, who operate the winding engine.
Breaker boy who removes impurities from coal.
Emergency Structure Engineer, who makes sure that cave-ins are dealt with when called
Modern miners
Mining engineers use the principles of math and science to develop philosophical solutions to technical problems for miners.
In most cases, a bachelor's degree in engineering, mining engineering or geological engineering is required. Because technology is constantly changing, miners and mining engineers need to continue their education.
The basics of mining engineering includes finding, extracting, and preparing minerals, metals and coal. These mined products are used for electric power generation and manufacturing industries. Mining engineers also supervise the construction of underground mine operations and create ways to transport the extracted minerals to processing plants.
Gallery

The Minerals Security Partnership (MSP) was a transnational association whose members sought to secure a stable supply of raw materials for their economies. The MSP was composed of 14 countries and the EU: Australia, Canada, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the European Union. Members professed a commitment to high Environmental, social, and corporate governance (ESG) standards. In 2026, the MSP was succeeded by the Forum on Resource Geostrategic Engagement (FORGE).
History
According to the inaugural announcement made at the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada convention in June 2022, the goal of the MSP "is to ensure that critical minerals are produced, processed, and recycled in a manner that supports the ability of countries to realize the full economic development benefit of their geological endowments."
India was inducted into the MSP in June 2023. Estonia joined the MSP in early March 2024.
On 4 February, during the "2026 Critical Minerals Ministerial", United States Secretary of State Marco Rubio announced the creation of the Forum on Resource Geostrategic Engagement (FORGE) as the successor to the Minerals Security Partnership (MSP). Building on the MSP, FORGE partners will collaborate at the policy and project levels to advance initiatives that strengthen diversified, resilient, and secure critical minerals supply chains.
Activities
The governments of Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia met with the MSP members at Investing in African Mining Indaba on 7 February 2023.
Reactions
The head of the Alaska Miners Association on 1 November 2022 said that "I worry that the MSP will prompt decision makers within the federal administration to prioritize mining in other countries in an attempt to walk a line between getting the minerals we must have but not developing ones in America under the name of conservation."

Mining is the extraction of geological materials and minerals from the surface of the Earth. Mining is required to obtain most materials that cannot be grown through agricultural processes, or feasibly created artificially in a laboratory or factory. Ores recovered by mining include metals, coal, oil shale, gemstones, limestone, chalk, dimension stone, rock salt, potash, gravel, and clay. The ore must be a rock or mineral that contains a valuable constituent, can be extracted or mined, and sold for profit. Mining in a wider sense includes extraction of any non-renewable resource such as petroleum, natural gas, or even water.
Mining is also associated with a range of environmental, health, and social impacts. Mining activities contribute to land degradation, water contamination, and habitat loss. In addition to environmental impacts, mining has been linked to occupational health risks and community displacement, and has affected low-income and marginalized populations.
Modern mining processes involve prospecting for ore bodies, analysis of the profit potential of a proposed mine, extraction of the desired materials, and final reclamation or restoration of the land after the mine is closed. Mining materials are often obtained from ore bodies, lodes, veins, seams, reefs, or placer deposits. The exploitation of these deposits for raw materials is dependent on investment, labor, energy, refining, and transportation costs.
Mining operations can have negative environmental impacts, both during mining and after the mine closes. Hence, most of the world's nations have enacted regulations to reduce the impact; however, the outsized role of mining in generating business for often rural, remote, or economically depressed communities means that governments frequently fail to enforce them fully. Work safety has long been a concern as well, and where enforced, modern practices have significantly improved safety in mines. Unregulated, poorly regulated or illegal mining, especially in developing economies, frequently contributes to local human rights violations and environmental conflicts. Mining can also perpetuate political instability through resource conflicts.
History
Prehistory
Since the beginning of civilization, people have used stone, clay, and, later, metals found near the Earth's surface. These were used to make early tools and weapons; for example, high-quality flint found in northern France, southern England, and Poland was used to create flint tools. Flint mines have been found in chalk areas where seams of the stone were followed underground by shafts and galleries. The mines at Grimes Graves and Krzemionki are especially famous, and like most other flint mines, are Neolithic in origin (c. 4000–3000 BC). Other hard rocks mined or collected for axes included the greenstone of the Langdale axe industry based in the English Lake District.
The oldest-known mine in the archaeological record is the Ngwenya Mine in Eswatini (Swaziland), which radiocarbon dating indicates is about 41,000 - 43,000 years old. At this site Paleolithic humans mined hematite to make the red pigment ochre. Mines of a similar age in Hungary are believed to be sites where Neanderthals may have mined flint for weapons and tools.
Ancient Egypt
Ancient Egyptians mined malachite at Maadi. At first, Egyptians used the bright green malachite stones for ornamentations and pottery. Later, between 2613 and 2494 BC, large building projects required expeditions abroad to the Wadi Maghareh region to secure minerals and other resources not available in Egypt itself. Quarries for turquoise and copper were also found at Wadi Hammamat, Tura, Aswan and various other Nubian sites, on the Sinai Peninsula, and at Timna. Quarries for gypsum were found at the Umm el-Sawwan site; gypsum was used to make funerary items for private tombs. Other minerals mined in Egypt from the Old Kingdom (2649–2134 BC) until the Roman Period (30 BC-AD 395) including granite, sandstone, limestone, basalt, travertine, gneiss, galena, and amethyst.
Mining in Egypt occurred in the earliest dynasties. The gold mines of Nubia were among the most extensive of any in Ancient Egypt. These mines are described by the Greek author Diodorus Siculus, who mentions fire-setting as one method used to break down the hard rock holding the gold. One of the complexes is shown in one of the earliest known mining maps. The miners crushed the ore and ground it to a fine powder before washing the powder for the gold dust known as the dry and wet attachment processes.
Ancient Greece and Rome
Mining in Europe has a very long history. Examples include the silver mines of Laurium, which helped support the Greek city state of Athens. Although they had over 20,000 slaves working them, their technology was essentially identical to their Bronze Age predecessors. At other mines, such as on the island of Thassos, marble was quarried by the Parians after they arrived in the 7th century BC. The marble was shipped away and was later found by archaeologists to have been used in buildings including the tomb of Amphipolis. Philip II of Macedon, the father of Alexander the Great, captured the gold mines of Mount Pangeo in 357 BC to fund his military campaigns. He also captured gold mines in Thrace for minting coinage, eventually producing 26 tons per year.
However, it was the Romans who developed large-scale mining methods, especially the use of large volumes of water brought to the minehead by numerous aqueducts. The water was used for a variety of purposes, including removing overburden and rock debris (a process called hydraulic mining), washing comminuted (or crushed) ores, and driving simple machinery.
The Romans used hydraulic mining methods on a large scale to prospect for the veins of ore, especially using a now-obsolete form of mining known as hushing. They built numerous aqueducts to supply water to the minehead, where the water was stored in large reservoirs and tanks. When a full tank was opened, the flood of water sluiced away the overburden to expose the bedrock underneath and any gold-bearing veins. The rock was then worked by fire-setting, heating it and then quenching it with a stream of water. The resulting thermal shock cracked the rock, enabling it to be removed by further streams of water from the overhead tanks. The Roman miners used similar methods to work cassiterite deposits in Cornwall and lead ore in the Pennines.
Sluicing methods were developed by the Romans in Spain in 25 AD to exploit large alluvial gold deposits, the largest site being at Las Medulas, where seven long aqueducts tapped local rivers and sluiced the deposits. The Romans also exploited the silver present in the argentiferous galena in the mines of Cartagena (Cartago Nova), Linares (Castulo), Plasenzuela and Azuaga, among many others. Spain was one of the most important mining regions, but all regions of the Roman Empire were exploited. In Great Britain the natives had mined minerals for millennia, but after the Roman conquest, the scale of the operations increased dramatically, as the Romans needed Britannia's resources, especially gold, silver, tin, and lead.
Roman techniques were not limited to surface mining. They followed the ore veins underground once opencast mining was no longer feasible. At Dolaucothi they stoped out the veins and drove adits through bare rock to drain the stopes. The same adits were also used to ventilate the workings, especially important when fire-setting was used. At other parts of the site, they penetrated the water table and dewatered the mines using several kinds of machines, especially reverse overshot water-wheels. These were used extensively in the copper mines at Rio Tinto in Spain, where one sequence comprised 16 such wheels arranged in pairs, and lifting water about 24 metres (79 ft). They worked as treadmills with miners standing on the top slats. Many examples of such devices have been found in old Roman mines, and some examples are now preserved in the British Museum and the National Museum of Wales.
Medieval Europe
Mining as an industry underwent dramatic changes in medieval Europe. The mining industry in the early Middle Ages was primarily focused on extracting copper and iron. Other precious metals were also used, mainly for gilding or coinage. Initially, many metals were obtained through open-pit mining, and ore was primarily extracted from shallow depths, rather than through deep mine shafts. Around the 14th century, the growing use of weapons, armour, stirrups, and horseshoes greatly increased the demand for iron. Medieval knights, for example, were often laden with up to 100 pounds (45 kg) of plate or chain link armour in addition to swords, lances and other weapons. The overwhelming dependency on iron for military purposes spurred iron production and extraction processes.
The silver crisis of 1465 occurred when all mines had reached depths at which the shafts could no longer be pumped dry with the available technology. Although an increased use of banknotes, credit and copper coins during this period did decrease the value of, and dependence on, precious metals, gold and silver remained vital to the story of medieval mining.
Due to differences in social structure, the increasing extraction of mineral deposits spread from central Europe to England in the mid-sixteenth century. On the continent, mineral deposits belonged to the crown, and this regalian right was stoutly maintained. But in England, royal mining rights were restricted to gold and silver (of which England had virtually no deposits) by a judicial decision of 1568 and a law in 1688. England had iron, zinc, copper, lead, and tin ores. Landlords who owned the base metals and coal under their estates had a strong incentive to extract these metals or lease the deposits and collect royalties from mine operators. English, German, and Dutch capital combined to finance extraction and refining. Hundreds of German technicians and skilled workers were brought over; in 1642, a colony of 4,000 foreigners was mining and smelting copper at Keswick in the northwestern mountains.
Use of water power in the form of water mills was extensive. The water mills were employed to crush ore, raise ore from shafts, and ventilate galleries by powering giant bellows. Black powder was first used in mining in Selmecbánya, Kingdom of Hungary (now Banská Štiavnica, Slovakia) in 1627. Black powder allowed blasting of rock and earth to loosen and reveal ore veins. Blasting was much faster than fire-setting and allowed the mining of previously impenetrable metals and ores. In 1762, one of the world's first mining academies was established in the same town.
The widespread adoption of agricultural innovations such as the iron plowshare, as well as the growing use of metal as a building material, was also a driving force in the tremendous growth of the iron industry during this period. The Spanish often used inventions such as the arrastra to pulverize ore after mining. This device was powered by animals and employed the same principles as grain threshing.
Much of the knowledge of medieval mining techniques comes from books such as Biringuccio's De la pirotechnia and, probably most importantly, from Georg Agricola's De re metallica (1556). These books detail many different mining methods used in German and Saxon mines. A prime issue in medieval mines, which Agricola explains in detail, was the removal of water from mining shafts. As miners dug deeper to access new veins, flooding became a very real obstacle. The mining industry became dramatically more efficient and prosperous with the invention of mechanically- and animal-driven pumps.
Africa
Iron metallurgy in Africa dates back over four thousand years. Gold became an important commodity for Africa during the trans-Saharan gold trade from the 7th century to the 14th century. Gold was often traded to Mediterranean economies that demanded gold and could supply salt, even though much of Africa was abundant with salt due to the mines and resources in the Sahara. The trade of gold for salt was primarily used to promote trade between different economies. Since the Great Trek in the 19th century, after, gold and diamond mining in Southern Africa has had major political and economic impacts. The Democratic Republic of Congo is the largest producer of diamonds in Africa, with an estimated 12 million carats in 2019. Other types of mining reserves in Africa include cobalt, bauxite, iron ore, coal, and copper.
Oceania
Gold and coal mining started in Australia and New Zealand in the 19th century. Nickel has become important in the economy of New Caledonia.
In Fiji, in 1934, the Emperor Gold Mining Company Ltd. established operations at Vatukoula, followed in 1935 by the Loloma Gold Mines, N.L., and then by Fiji Mines Development Ltd. (aka Dolphin Mines Ltd.). These developments ushered in a "mining boom", with gold production rising more than a hundred-fold, from 931.4 oz in 1934 to 107,788.5 oz in 1939, an order of magnitude then comparable to the combined output of New Zealand and Australia's eastern states.
Americas
During prehistoric times, early Americans mined large quantities of copper along Lake Superior's Keweenaw Peninsula and on nearby Isle Royale; metallic copper remained near the surface into colonial times. Indigenous peoples used Lake Superior copper from at least 5,000 years ago; copper tools, arrowheads, and other artifacts that were part of an extensive native trade-network have been discovered. In addition, obsidian, flint, and other minerals were mined, worked, and traded. Early French explorers who encountered the sites made no use of the metals due to the difficulties of transporting them, but the copper was eventually traded throughout the continent along major river routes.
In the early colonial history of the Americas, "native gold and silver was quickly expropriated and sent back to Spain in fleets of gold- and silver-laden galleons", the gold and silver originating mostly from mines in Central and South America. Turquoise dated at 700 AD was mined in pre-Columbian America; in the Cerillos Mining District in New Mexico, an estimate of "about 15,000 tons of rock had been removed from Mt. Chalchihuitl using stone tools before 1700."
In 1727 Louis Denys (Denis) (1675–1741), sieur de La Ronde – brother of Simon-Pierre Denys de Bonaventure and the son-in-law of René Chartier – took command of Fort La Pointe at Chequamegon Bay; where natives informed him of an island of copper. La Ronde obtained permission from the French crown to operate mines in 1733, becoming "the first practical miner on Lake Superior"; seven years later, mining was halted by an outbreak between Sioux and Chippewa tribes.
Mining in the United States became widespread in the 19th century, and the United States Congress passed the General Mining Act of 1872 to encourage mining of federal lands. As with the California Gold Rush in the mid-19th century, mining for minerals and precious metals, along with ranching, became a driving factor in the U.S. Westward Expansion to the Pacific coast. With the exploration of the West, mining camps sprang up and "expressed a distinctive spirit, an enduring legacy to the new nation"; Gold Rushers would experience the same problems as the Land Rushers of the transient West that preceded them. Aided by railroads, many people traveled West for work opportunities in mining. Western cities such as Denver and Sacramento originated as mining towns.
When new areas were explored, it was usually the gold (placer and then lode) and then silver that were taken into possession and extracted first. Other metals would often wait for railroads or canals, as coarse gold dust and nuggets do not require smelting and are easy to identify and transport.
Modernity
In the early 20th century, the gold and silver rush to the western United States also stimulated mining for coal as well as base metals such as copper, lead, and iron. Areas in modern Montana, Utah, Arizona, and later Alaska became major suppliers of copper to the world, which was increasingly in demand for electrical and household goods. Canada's mining industry grew more slowly than did the United States due to limitations in transportation, capital, and U.S. competition; Ontario was the major producer of the early 20th century with nickel, copper, and gold.
Meanwhile, Australia experienced the Australian gold rushes and by the 1850s was producing 40% of the world's gold, followed by the establishment of large mines such as the Mount Morgan Mine, which ran for nearly a hundred years, Broken Hill ore deposit (one of the largest zinc-lead ore deposits), and the iron ore mines at Iron Knob. After declines in production, another boom in mining occurred in the 1960s. In the early 21st century, Australia remains a major world mineral producer.
As the 21st century begins, a globalized mining industry dominated by large multinational corporations has emerged. Peak minerals and environmental impacts have also become a concern. Different elements, particularly rare-earth minerals, have begun to increase in demand as a result of new technologies.
In 2023, 8.5 billion metric tons of coal were extracted from the Earth's crust. However, as the global economy transitions away from fossil fuels and toward a more sustainable future, the demand for metals is set to skyrocket. Between 2022 and 2050, an estimated 7 billion metric tons of metals will need to be extracted. Steel will account for the largest portion of this total at 5 billion tons, followed by aluminum at 950 million tons, copper at 650 million tons, graphite at 170 million tons, nickel at 100 million tons, and other metals. Notably, the energy expenditure required to extract these metals will soon surpass that of coal mining, highlighting the growing importance of sustainable metal extraction practices.
Mine development and life cycle
The process of mining, from the discovery of an ore body through mineral extraction to the final return of the land to its natural state, consists of several distinct steps. The first is the discovery of the ore body, carried out through prospecting or exploration to identify and define its extent, location, and value. This leads to a mathematical resource estimation of the deposit's size and grade.
This estimation is used to conduct a pre-feasibility study to determine the theoretical economics of the ore deposit. This identifies early on whether further investment in estimation and engineering studies is warranted and highlights key risks and areas for further work. The next step is to conduct a feasibility study to evaluate the project's financial viability, technical and financial risks, and robustness.
This is when the mining company decides whether to develop the mine or walk away from the project. This includes mine planning to evaluate the economically recoverable portion of the deposit, the metallurgy and ore recoverability, marketability and payability of the ore concentrates, engineering concerns, milling and infrastructure costs, finance and equity requirements, and an analysis of the proposed mine from the initial excavation all the way through to reclamation. The proportion of a deposit that is economically recoverable is dependent on the enrichment factor of the ore in the area.
To gain access to the mineral deposit within an area, it is often necessary to mine through or remove waste material, which is not of immediate interest to the miner. The total movement of ore and waste constitutes the mining process. Often, more waste than ore is mined during the life of a mine, depending on the nature and location of the ore body. Waste removal and placement are major costs to the mining operator, so a detailed characterization of the waste material forms an essential part of the geological exploration program for a mining operation.
Once the analysis determines that a given ore body is worth recovering, development begins to provide access to it. The mine buildings and processing plants are built, and any necessary equipment is obtained. The operation of the mine to recover the ore begins and continues as long as the company operating the mine finds it economical to do so. Once all the ore that the mine can produce profitably is recovered, reclamation can begin, to make the land used by the mine suitable for future use.
Technical and economic challenges notwithstanding, successful mine development must also address human factors. Working conditions are paramount to success, especially with respect to exposure to dust, radiation, noise, explosive hazards, and vibration, as well as illumination standards. Mining today increasingly must address environmental and community impacts, including psychological and sociological dimensions. Thus, mining educator Frank T. M. White (1909–1971) broadened the focus to the "total environment of mining", including reference to community development around mining, and how mining is portrayed to an urban society, which depends on the industry, although seemingly unaware of this dependency. He stated, "[I]n the past, mining engineers have not been called upon to study the psychological, sociological, and personal problems of their own industry – aspects that nowadays are assuming tremendous importance. The mining engineer must rapidly expand his knowledge and his influence into these newer fields."
Techniques
Mining techniques can be divided into two common excavation types: surface mining and sub-surface (underground) mining. Today, surface mining is much more common and produces, for example, 85% of minerals (excluding petroleum and natural gas) in the United States, including 98% of metallic ores.
Targets are divided into two general categories of materials: placer deposits, consisting of valuable minerals contained within river gravels, beach sands, and other unconsolidated materials; and lode deposits, where valuable minerals are found in veins, in layers, or in mineral grains generally distributed throughout a mass of actual rock. Both types of ore deposit, placer or lode, are mined by both surface and underground methods.
Some mining, including much of the rare earth element and uranium mining, is done by less common methods, such as in-situ leaching. This technique involves neither digging at the surface nor underground. The extraction of target minerals by this technique requires that they be soluble, e.g., potash, potassium chloride, sodium chloride, sodium sulfate, which dissolve in water. Some minerals, such as copper minerals and uranium oxide, require acid or carbonate solutions to dissolve.
Explosives in mining
Explosives have been used in surface mining and sub-surface mining to blast out rock and ore intended for processing. The most common explosive used in mining is ammonium nitrate. Between 1870 and 1920, in Queensland, Australia, an increase in mining accidents led to more safety measures surrounding the use of explosives for mining. In the United States of America, between 1990 and 1999, about 22.3 billion kilograms of explosives were used in mining quarrying and other industries; Moreover "coal mining used 66.4%, nonmetal mining and quarrying 13.5%, metal mining 10.4%, construction 7.1%, and all other users 2.6%".
Artisanal
Surface
Surface mining is done by removing surface vegetation, dirt, and bedrock to reach buried ore deposits. Techniques of surface mining include: open-pit mining, which is the recovery of materials from an open pit in the ground; quarrying, identical to open-pit mining except that it refers to sand, stone and clay; strip mining, which consists of stripping surface layers off to reveal ore underneath; and mountaintop removal, commonly associated with coal mining, which involves taking the top of a mountain off to reach ore deposits at depth. Most placer deposits, because they are shallowly buried, are mined by surface methods. Finally, landfill mining involves excavating and processing landfill sites. Landfill mining has been thought of as a long-term solution to methane emissions and local pollution.
High wall
High-wall mining, which evolved from auger mining, is another form of surface mining. In high wall mining, the remaining part of a coal seam previously exploited by other surface-mining techniques has too much overburden to be removed but can still be profitably exploited from the side of the artificial cliff made by previous mining. A typical cycle alternates sumping, which undercuts the seam, and shearing, which raises and lowers the cutter-head boom to cut the entire height of the coal seam. As the coal recovery cycle continues, the cutter head is progressively advanced further into the coal seam. High wall mining can produce thousands of tons of coal in contour-strip operations with narrow benches, previously mined areas, trench mine applications, and steep-dip seams.
Underground mining
Subsurface mining involves digging tunnels or shafts into the earth to access buried ore deposits. Ore for processing and waste rock for disposal are brought to the surface through the tunnels and shafts. Subsurface mining can be classified by the type of access shafts used, the extraction method, or the technique for reaching the mineral deposit. Drift mining uses horizontal access tunnels, slope mining uses diagonally sloping access shafts, and shaft mining uses vertical access shafts. Mining in hard and soft rock formations requires different techniques.
Other methods include shrinkage stope mining, which is mining upward, creating a sloping underground room, long wall mining, which is grinding a long ore surface underground, and room and pillar mining, which is removing ore from rooms while leaving pillars in place to support the roof of the room. Room-and-pillar mining often leads to retreat mining, in which supporting pillars are removed as miners retreat, allowing the room to cave in and thereby loosening more ore. Additional sub-surface mining methods include hard rock mining, borehole mining, drift and fill mining, long hole slope mining, sub-level caving, and block caving.
Machines
Heavy machinery is used in mining to explore and develop sites, to remove and stockpile overburden, to break and remove rocks of various hardness and toughness, to process the ore, and to carry out reclamation projects after the mine is closed. Bulldozers, drills, explosives, and trucks are all necessary for excavating the land. In the case of placer mining, unconsolidated gravel, or alluvium, is fed into machinery consisting of a hopper and a shaking screen or trommel, which frees the desired minerals from the waste gravel. The minerals are then concentrated using sluices or jigs.
Large drills are used to sink shafts, excavate stopes, and obtain samples for analysis, and to extract natural gas (see Fracking). Trams are used to transport miners, minerals, and waste. Lifts carry miners into and out of mines, move rock and ore out, and move machinery in and out of underground mines. Huge trucks, shovels, and cranes are employed in surface mining to move large quantities of overburden and ore. Processing plants use large crushers, mills, reactors, roasters, and other equipment to consolidate the mineral-rich material and extract the desired compounds and metals from the ore.
Processing
Once the mineral is extracted, it is often then processed. The science of extractive metallurgy is a specialized branch of metallurgy that studies the extraction of valuable metals from ores, particularly by chemical or mechanical means.
Mineral processing (or mineral dressing) is a specialized area in the science of metallurgy that studies the mechanical means of crushing, grinding, and washing that enable the separation (extractive metallurgy) of valuable metals or minerals from their gangue (waste material). Processing of placer ore material consists of gravity-based separation methods, such as Sluice boxes. Only minor shaking or washing may be necessary to disaggregate (unclump) the sands or gravels before processing. Processing ore from a lode mine, whether surface or subsurface, requires crushing and pulverizing the ore before extraction of the valuable minerals begins. After the ore is crushed, the valuable minerals are recovered using one or a combination of mechanical and chemical techniques.
Since most metals are present in ores as oxides or sulfides, the metal needs to be reduced to its metallic form. This can be accomplished through chemical means such as smelting or through electrolytic reduction, as in the case of aluminium. Geometallurgy combines the geologic sciences with extractive metallurgy and mining.
In 2018, led by Chemistry and Biochemistry professor Bradley D. Smith, University of Notre Dame researchers "invented a new class of molecules whose shape and size enable them to capture and contain precious metal ions," reported in a study published by the Journal of the American Chemical Society. The new method "converts gold-containing ore into chloroauric acid and extracts it using an industrial solvent. The container molecules are able to selectively separate the gold from the solvent without the use of water stripping." The newly developed molecules can eliminate water stripping, whereas mining traditionally "relies on a 125-year-old method that treats gold-containing ore with large quantities of poisonous sodium cyanide... this new process has a milder environmental impact and that, besides gold, it can be used for capturing other metals such as platinum and palladium," and could also be used in urban mining processes that remove precious metals from wastewater streams.
Industry
Mining exists in many countries. London is the headquarters of Anglo American. Melbourne is the headquarters of the world's two largest mining companies BHP and Rio Tinto. The US mining industry is also large and dominated by extraction of coal and other nonmetal minerals (e.g., rock and sand), and various regulations have worked to reduce the significance of mining in the United States. In 2007, the total market capitalization of mining companies was reported at US$962 billion, which compares to a total global market cap of publicly traded companies of about US$50 trillion in 2007. In 2002, Chile and Peru were reportedly the major mining countries of South America. The mineral industry of Africa includes the mining of various minerals; it produces relatively little of the industrial metals copper, lead, and zinc, but according to one estimate has as a percent of world reserves 40% of gold, 60% of cobalt, and 90% of the world's platinum group metals. Mining in India is a significant part of that country's economy. In the developed world, mining in Australia, with BHP founded and headquartered in the country, and mining in Canada, are particularly significant. For rare earth minerals mining, China reportedly controlled 95% of production in 2013.
While individual entrepreneurs or small businesses can conduct exploration and mining, most modern-day mines are large enterprises that require substantial capital to establish. Consequently, the mining sector of the industry is dominated by large, often multinational companies, most of which are publicly listed. It can be argued that what is referred to as the 'mining industry' comprises two sectors: one specializing in the exploration of new resources and the other in mining those resources. The exploration sector is typically made up of individuals and small mineral resource companies, called "juniors", that depend on venture capital. The mining sector comprises large multinational companies that are sustained by production from their operations. Various other industries, such as equipment manufacturing, environmental testing, and metallurgical analysis, rely on and support the mining industry worldwide. Canadian stock exchanges have a particular focus on mining companies, particularly junior exploration companies, through Toronto's TSX Venture Exchange; Canadian companies raise capital on these exchanges and then invest the money in exploration globally. Some have argued that below juniors, there exists a substantial sector of illegitimate companies primarily focused on manipulating stock prices.
Mining operations can be grouped into five major categories based on the resources they exploit. These are oil and gas extraction, coal mining, metal ore mining, nonmetallic mineral mining and quarrying, and mining support activities. Of all of these categories, oil and gas extraction remains one of the largest in terms of its global economic importance. Prospecting potential mining sites, a vital area of concern for the mining industry, is now done using sophisticated new technologies such as seismic prospecting and remote-sensing satellites. Mining is heavily affected by the prices of the commodity minerals, which are often volatile. The 2000s commodities boom ("commodities supercycle") increased commodity prices, driving aggressive mining. In addition, the price of gold increased dramatically in the 2000s, which increased gold mining; for example, one study found that conversion of forest in the Amazon increased six-fold from the period 2003–2006 (292 ha/yr) to the period 2006–2009 (1,915 ha/yr), largely due to artisanal mining.
Corporate classifications
Mining companies can be classified based on their size and financial capabilities:
Major companies are considered to have an adjusted annual mining-related revenue of more than US$500 million, with the financial capability to develop a major mine on its own.
Intermediate companies have at least $50 million in annual revenue but less than $500 million.
Junior companies rely on equity financing as their principal means of funding exploration. Juniors are mainly pure exploration companies, but may also produce minimally, and do not have a revenue exceeding US$50 million.
Regarding their valuation and stock market characteristics, see Valuation (finance) § Valuation of mining projects.
World Bank
The World Bank has been involved in mining since 1955, mainly through grants from its International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, with the Bank's Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency offering political risk insurance. Between 1955 and 1990 it provided about $2 billion to fifty mining projects, broadly categorized as reform and rehabilitation, greenfield mine construction, mineral processing, technical assistance, and engineering. These projects have been criticized, particularly the Ferro Carajas project of Brazil, begun in 1981. The World Bank established mining codes intended to increase foreign investment; in 1988, it solicited feedback from 45 mining companies on how to increase their involvement.
In 1992, the World Bank began to push for privatization of government-owned mining companies with a new set of codes, beginning with its report The Strategy for African Mining. In 1997, Latin America's largest miner Companhia Vale do Rio Doce (CVRD) was privatized. These and other developments, such as the Philippines 1995 Mining Act, led the bank to publish a third report (Assistance for Minerals Sector Development and Reform in Member Countries), which endorsed mandatory environmental impact assessments and attention to the concerns of the local population. The codes based on this report are influential in the legislation of developing nations. The new codes are intended to encourage development through tax holidays, zero customs duties, reduced income taxes, and related measures. The results of these codes were analyzed by a group from the University of Quebec, which concluded that the codes promote foreign investment but "fall very short of permitting sustainable development". The observed negative correlation between natural resources and economic development is known as the resource curse.
Safety
Safety has long been a concern in the mining business, especially in sub-surface mining. The Courrières mine disaster, Europe's worst mining accident, involved the death of 1,099 miners in Northern France on March 10, 1906. This disaster was surpassed only by the Benxihu Colliery accident in China on April 26, 1942, which killed 1,549 miners. Although mining today is substantially safer than it was in previous decades, mining accidents still occur.
Government figures indicate that around 5,000 Chinese miners die in accidents each year, while other reports have suggested a figure as high as 20,000.
Between 1870 and 1920 in Queensland, Australia, an increase in mining accidents led to more safety measures regarding the use of explosives in mining.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), safety concerns have been raised for both those who work in the mines and those who live in the surrounding areas. Workers are usually seen with a mustard-colored powder that turned out to be "...dried sulfuric acid, [which] they use in the mine to process the [mineral] ores. Surrounding the mine, there is a "small stream of foul, sludgy water that passes beneath a bridge next to the fence." Around the mine, biomonitoring studies of metal exposure show that "The levels found in Kinshasa remain above the CDC reference value (>5 μg/dL) and constitute a public health concern," and that subjects living close (< 3 km) to mines or metal-processing industries have higher urinary concentrations of various metals (p < 0.01) than those living further away (3-10 km)," revealing an "... absence of a national policy to control and prevent exposure to harmful chemicals." In the mines, specifically at the Tenke Fungurume mine, there were hundreds of thousands of people [who] engaged in the feverish excavation of cobalt in medieval conditions." These workers were locals who worked for "two dollars (roughly one day's income)." In addition, the rates of schistosomiasis, a mining related disease endemic to DRC, were found to be "higher among mining workers (27%) than in the total population (<13 %)," indicating harmful long-term impacts for the workers.
In South Africa, issues are similar to those in the DRC. Miners are exposed to silica dust, which "increases the risk of pulmonary tuberculosis," with a tuberculosis rate of "over 1,000 per 100,000." "Mine shafts themselves are crowded and poorly-ventilated, but so are hostels where over a dozen men can share a small room. These conditions are highly conducive to infection; the rate of recurrent tuberculosis in a recent South African prospective cohort of 600 miners was about 8 per 100 person-years," which increases the risk of tuberculosis spreading in both mining and living locations. Past the mines, the "extraction of minerals often leads to the disruption of ecosystems, polluting water sources, and degrading habitats including cultural heritage critical for the livelihoods of people."
Mining accidents continue worldwide, including incidents that have caused dozens of fatalities at a time, such as the 2007 Ulyanovskaya Mine disaster in Russia, the 2009 Heilongjiang mine explosion in China, and the 2010 Upper Big Branch Mine disaster in the United States. Mining has been identified by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) as a priority industry sector in the National Occupational Research Agenda (NORA) to identify and provide intervention strategies regarding occupational health and safety issues. The Mining Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) was established in 1978 to "work to prevent death, illness, and injury from mining and promote safe and healthful workplaces for US miners." Since its implementation in 1978, the number of miner fatalities has decreased from 242 miners in 1978 to 24 miners in 2019.
There are numerous occupational hazards associated with mining, including exposure to rockdust, which can lead to diseases such as silicosis, asbestosis, and pneumoconiosis. Gases in the mine can lead to asphyxiation and have a risk of ignition. Mining equipment can generate considerable noise, putting workers at risk for hearing loss. Cave-ins, rock falls, and exposure to excess heat are also known hazards. The current NIOSH Recommended Exposure Limit (REL) of noise is 85 dBA with a 3 dBA exchange rate, and the MSHA Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) is 90 dBA with a 5 dBA exchange rate as an 8-hour time-weighted average. NIOSH has found that 25% of noise-exposed workers in Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction have hearing impairment. The prevalence of hearing loss increased by 1% from 1991 to 2001 within these workers.
Noise studies have been conducted in several mining environments. Stageloaders (84-102 dBA), shearers (85-99 dBA), auxiliary fans (84–120 dBA), continuous mining machines (78–109 dBA), and roof bolters (92–103 dBA) represent some of the noisiest equipment in underground coal mines. Dragline oilers, dozer operators, and welders using air arcing were occupations with the highest noise exposures among surface coal miners. Coal mines had the highest hearing loss injury likelihood.
Environmental effects
Mining activities can significantly contribute to water pollution through the release of heavy metals and toxic substances into surrounding waterways. Processes such as acid mine drainage occur when sulfide minerals are exposed to air and water, producing acidic runoff that carry contaminants such as arsenic, lead, and mercury into rivers and groundwater. This pollution can harm aquatic ecosystems, reduce water quality, and pose risks to human health, particularly in communities that rely on local water sources for drinking and agriculture. In some cases, contamination persists long after mining operations have stopped, making remediation difficult and costly.
Water pollution from mining can also result from the storage and disposal of mine waste, including tailings and waste rock, which may contain hazardous chemicals and heavy metals. Failures or leaks in tailings storage facilities have released large volumes of contaminated materials into rivers and surrounding ecosystems, causing widespread environmental damage. Even without major failures, runoff from mining sites can transport pollutants into nearby waterways during rainfall events, further degrading water quality. Abandoned mine sites are a particularly significant source of ongoing contamination, as untreated drainage can continue to release acidic and metal laden water into the environment for decades after closure.
This is important because water is vital for many communities’ survival. Fresh rivers are a source of fish and fresh water. However, the water isn’t fresh anymore, it is heavily polluted by toxic runoff from nearby mines. Researcher Siddharth Kara explains that in the context of cobalt mining in the Democratic Republic of Congo, “water is heavily polluted, a condition that local residents attribute to toxic runoff from nearby mines. The environmental researcher at the University of Lubumbashi whom I met after my visit to Kipushi, Germain, took samples from the river water near Mupanja and found particularly high levels of lead, chromium, cobalt, and industrial acids. When I inspected the water, it had an unnaturally dark color and was topped with slicks and sludge”.
Environmental regulation
Countries with strongly enforced mining regulations commonly require environmental impact assessment, development of environmental management plans, and mine closure planning before beginning mine operations. Environmental monitoring during operation and after closure may also be required. Government regulations may not be well enforced, especially in the developing world.
For major mining companies and any company seeking international financing, there are some other mechanisms to enforce environmental standards. These generally relate to financing standards such as the Equator Principles, IFC environmental standards, and criteria for Socially responsible investing. Mining companies have used this oversight from the financial sector to argue for some level of industry self-regulation. In 1992, a Draft Code of Conduct for Transnational Corporations was proposed at the Rio Earth Summit by the UN Centre for Transnational Corporations (UNCTC), but the Business Council for Sustainable Development (BCSD) together with the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) argued successfully for self-regulation instead.
This was followed by the Global Mining Initiative which was begun by nine of the largest metals and mining companies and which led to the formation of the International Council on Mining and Metals, whose purpose was to "act as a catalyst" in an effort to improve social and environmental performance in the mining and metals industry internationally. The mining industry has provided funding to various conservation groups, some of which have been working with conservation agendas that are at odds with an emerging acceptance of the rights of indigenous people – particularly the right to make land-use decisions.
Certification of mines with good practices is issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). For example, ISO 9000 and ISO 14001, which certify an "auditable environmental management system", involve brief inspections, although they have been criticized for lacking rigor. Certification is also available through Ceres' Global Reporting Initiative, but these reports are voluntary and unverified. Miscellaneous other certification programs exist for various projects, typically through nonprofit groups.
The purpose of a 2012 EPS PEAKS paper was to provide evidence on policies managing ecological costs and maximize socio-economic benefits of mining using host country regulatory initiatives. It found existing literature suggesting that donors encourage developing countries to:
Make the environment-poverty link and introduce cutting-edge wealth measures and natural capital accounts.
Reform old taxes in line with more recent financial innovation, engage directly with the companies, enact land use and impact assessments, and incorporate specialized support and standards agencies.
Set in play transparency and community participation initiatives using the wealth accrued.
Waste
Ore mills generate large amounts of waste, called tailings. For example, 99 tons of waste is generated per ton of copper, with even higher ratios in gold mining – because only 5.3 g of gold is extracted per ton of ore, a ton of gold produces 200,000 tons of tailings. (As time goes on and richer deposits are exhausted – and technology improves – this number is going down to .5 g and less.) These tailings can be toxic. Tailings, which are usually produced as a slurry, are most commonly dumped into ponds made from naturally existing valleys. These ponds are secured by impoundments (dams or embankment dams). In 2000, it was estimated that 3,500 tailings impoundments existed, and that every year, 2 to 5 major failures and 35 minor failures occurred. For example, in the Marcopper mining disaster at least 2 million tons of tailings were released into a local river. In 2015, Barrick Gold Corporation spilled over 1 million liters of cyanide into a total of five rivers in Argentina near their Veladero mine. Since 2007 in central Finland, the Talvivaara Terrafame polymetal mine's waste effluent and leaks of saline mine water have resulted in ecological collapse of a nearby lake. Subaqueous tailings disposal is another option. The mining industry has argued that submarine tailings disposal (STD), which disposes of tailings in the sea, is ideal because it avoids the risks of tailings ponds. The practice is illegal in the United States and Canada, but it is used in the developing world.
The waste is classified as either sterile or mineralized, with acid-generating potential, and the movement and storage of this material form a major part of the mine planning process. When an economic cut-off determines the mineralised package, the near-grade mineralised waste is usually dumped separately, with a view to later treatment should market conditions change, and it becomes economically viable. Civil engineering design parameters are used for waste dump design, with special conditions applying to high-rainfall and seismically active areas. Waste dump designs must meet all regulatory requirements of the country in whose jurisdiction the mine is located. It is also common practice to rehabilitate dumps to an internationally acceptable standard, which, in some cases, means applying higher standards than the local regulatory standard.
Abandoned and inactive mines can continue to create environmental risks after operations have ended. They can have detrimental effects on soil, water, plants, and animals. Acid mine drainage, which occurs when minerals are exposed to air and water, can result in the long-term release of acid water and heavy metals into nearby water. These effects can continue for decades or longer, contaminating drinking water and harming ecosystems. The National Park Service explains that, “Soils and water contaminated with heavy metals or chemicals from mineral processing may be harmful to wildlife. These contaminants can become increasingly concentrated in animals higher up the food chain in a process called biomagnification. Affected animals could die or become unable to reproduce”.
Human Rights and Environmental Justice
In addition to the environmental impacts of mining processes, a prominent criticism of this form of extractive practice and of mining companies concerns the human rights abuses occurring at mining sites and in communities near them. Frequently, despite being protected by International Labor rights, miners are not given appropriate equipment to provide them with protection from possible mine collapse or from harmful pollutants and chemicals expelled during the mining process, work in inhumane conditions spending numerous hours working in extreme heat, darkness and 14 hour workdays with no allocated time for breaks. In addition, many of these legal structures disproportionally harm indigenous communities.
These are all examples of environmental justice. Environmental justice refers to the fair distribution of environmental benefits and burdens, as well as the involvement of all communities in environmental decision making. In the context of mining, environmental justice concerns arise when environmental and health impacts disproportionately affect low income, indigenous, or marginalized populations. These impacts include exposure to toxic substances, displacement from land, and limited access to political or legal resources to address this environmental harm. Mining operations are often located in regions where communities have less political power, raising concerns about inequality and long-term environmental and social consequences.
Mining related environmental impacts are often unevenly distributed, disproportionately affecting rural and low income communities. Abandoned mines, toxic waste, and water contamination can persist long after mining operations stop, creating long-term burdens on communities. From Massachusetts Institute of Technology, they mentioned the March 2023 United Nations Water Conference in New York, explaining that “A quarter of the world’s population already faces ‘extremely high water stress’ according to the World Resources Institute (Blais, 2024).” This is a problem because mining requires an enormous amount of water, already straining local water supplies. The world is already at risk for water deprivation, so almost every population and community is at risk. Communities affected by mining require fair rights and resources to help prevent environmental contamination from affecting them but also everyone (Blais, 2024).
Regulation and governance
New regulations and a process of legislative reforms aim to improve the harmonization and stability of the mining sector in mineral-rich countries. New legislation for mining industry in African countries still appears to be an issue, but has the potential to be solved, when a consensus is reached on the best approach. By the beginning of the 21st century, the booming and increasingly complex mining sector in mineral-rich countries was providing only slight benefits to local communities, especially given the sustainability issues. Increasing debate and influence by NGOs and local communities called for new approaches which would also include disadvantaged communities, and work towards sustainable development even after mine closure (including transparency and revenue management). By the early 2000s, community development issues and resettlement had become mainstream concerns in World Bank mining projects. Mining-industry expansion after mineral prices increased in 2003, and also potential fiscal revenues in those countries created an omission in the other economic sectors in terms of finances and development. Furthermore, this highlighted the regional and local demand for mining revenues and the inability of sub-national governments to use them effectively. The Fraser Institute (a Canadian think tank) has highlighted the environmental protection laws in developing countries, as well as voluntary efforts by mining companies to improve their environmental impact.
In 2007, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) was mainstreamed in all countries cooperating with the World Bank in mining industry reform. The EITI operates and was implemented with the support of the EITI multi-donor trust fund, managed by the World Bank. The EITI aims to increase transparency in transactions between governments and companies in extractive industries by monitoring the revenues and benefits between industries and recipient governments. The entrance process is voluntary for each country and is monitored by multiple stakeholders, including governments, private companies, and civil society representatives, responsible for disclosure and dissemination of the reconciliation report; however, the competitive disadvantage of company-by-company public report is, for some of the businesses in Ghana at least, the main constraint. Therefore, the outcome assessment in terms of failure or success of the new EITI regulation does not only "rest on the government's shoulders" but also on civil society and companies.
However, implementation has issues; inclusion or exclusion of artisanal mining and small-scale mining (ASM) from the EITI, and how to deal with "non-cash" payments made by companies to subnational governments. Furthermore, the disproportionate revenues the mining industry can bring to the comparatively small number of people that it employs, causes other problems, like a lack of investment in other less lucrative sectors, leading to swings in government revenue because of volatility in the oil markets. Artisanal mining is clearly an issue in EITI Countries such as the Central African Republic, D.R. Congo, Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone – i.e., almost half of the mining countries implementing the EITI. Among other things, the limited scope of the EITI involving disparity in terms of knowledge of the industry and negotiation skills, thus far, flexibility of the policy (e.g., liberty of the countries to expand beyond the minimum requirements and adapt it to their needs), creates another risk of unsuccessful implementation. Increased public awareness, with the government acting as a bridge between the public and the initiative to ensure a successful policy outcome, is an important element to consider.
Child labor
Included within the human rights abuses that occur during mining processes are instances of child labor. These instances have sparked widespread criticism of mining cobalt, a mineral essential for powering modern technologies such as laptops, smartphones, and electric vehicles. Many of these cases of child laborers are found in locations such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Africa, the Philippines, Australia, and Brazil. Reports have risen of children carrying sacks of cobalt weighing 25 kg from small mines to local traders being paid for their work only in food and accommodation. Many companies, such as Apple, Google, Microsoft, and Tesla have been implicated in lawsuits brought by families whose children were severely injured or killed during mining activities in Congo. In December 2019, 14 Congolese families filed a lawsuit against Glencore, a mining company which supplies the essential cobalt to these multinational corporations with allegations of negligence that led to the deaths of children or injuries such as broken spines, emotional distress and forced labor.
Labor Conditions in the Democratic Republic of Congo
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, mining, specifically for cobalt, has been associated with significant human rights concerns. Artisanal and small-scale mining operations often involve hazardous working conditions, including exposure to toxic dust, risk of tunnel collapses, and a lack of protective equipment. Reports have documented the use of child labor and low wages in mining areas. Workers and nearby communities also face long-term health risks due to environmental contamination from mining activities. These conditions have raised concerns from nearby communities regarding supply chains and the responsibility of multinational corporations involved in mineral sourcing.
Conditions in the mines and nearby communities have become difficult places to live, work, and stay in. While digging in the mines, it is difficult to predict when walls of the mines will collapse and cause irreversible injuries. Researcher Siddharth Kara provides examples of such issues in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, explaining that “While [miners] were digging, one of the walls of the pit collapsed. [Miners] were buried in an avalanche of stones and dirt”. After this collapse, “The clinic did not have any painkillers other than acetaminophen, which was incapable of dulling his discomfort. The clinic also did not have antibiotics to treat a potential infection, nor an x-ray machine with which to determine the extent of the bone damage” (Kara, 2023). Because of the damage from the mine and the lack of accessible healthcare, people suffer from irreversible damage for the rest of their lives, making them unable to walk, therefore unable to work in the mines again and make money to support their family. Working in the mines puts you at risk for injury and even death. From the Human Rights Research Center, Erina Bazán López, a motivated scholar, writes about the recent toll of cobalt mining on people in the Congo. “On November 15th, a makeshift bridge on a cobalt and copper mine collapsed in Lualaba province in Democratic Republic of Congo, killing at least 32 people. The disasters occurred in a semi-industrial mine in the southeastern Kalando area of the province, where a comprehensive restriction prohibiting access had been previously put in place due to heavy rains that exacerbated risks of landslides in the territory (Bazán López, 2025). There are many of these incidents happening in the DRC throughout the years, often unpredictable.
Artisanal miners, who account for a substantial portion of cobalt production in the country, often work in informal settings with limited regulatory oversight, making enforcement of labor and safety standards difficult. In some mining regions, individuals rely on daily extraction for income, creating economic pressures that contribute to unsafe practices and the involvement of children in mining activities. Environmental contamination from mining operations, including the release of heavy metals into soil and water, has been linked to broader public health concerns in surrounding communities. These conditions have prompted increased international attention and calls for greater supply chain transparency, corporate due diligence, and stronger regulatory frameworks to help improve labor conditions and reduce environmental health risks.
There has been an increase in child labor in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Children start working in the mines when they are very young, experiencing the true conditions of the mines including toxic air, injuries, and an overall unsafe environment for children to work in. The main reason for child labor is due to the need for income. Because people working in the mines only get paid 2 dollars per day, this drives many families to send more of their members, including children, into the mines. Kara explained to NPR that “Hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced because their villages were just bulldozed over to make place for large mining concessions. So you have people with no alternative, no other source of income, no livelihood. Now, add to that the menace in many cases of armed forces pressuring people to dig, parents having to make a painful decision, ‘Do I send my child to school or do we eat today?’ And if they choose the latter, that means bringing all their kids into these toxic pits to dig just to earn that extra fifty cents or a dollar a day, that could mean the difference between eating or not” (Kara, 2023). Need for income drives families to send their children into the mines, exposing them to toxins, and potential physical health effects from falling walls. Most families do not have a choice about sending their kids, because otherwise they would not eat. An increase in income would change lots of peoples lives, and likely prevent child labor.
Uranium Mining on Native Land
Uranium mining has had significant impacts on Indigenous communities because their tribes are located near their land. In the article, Green Victimization of Native Americans: Uranium Mining as a From of Toxic Colonialism and Genocide, it says, “A recent study exploring the consumption of sheep in a Navajo community demonstrated how contamination from uranium mining affected diet and had cultural implications. Although sheep were traditionally a stample in Navajo diet, the authors found Navajo consumption of sheep was mostly ceremnonial. However, the Navajo suggested the contamination of sheep could alter or threaten traditional ceremonies” (Fegadel, 2023). Because of the impacts contamination from uranium mining has on the ecological system, this results in traditional tribal lifestyle to be affected. Along with sheep, fish and local plants are used for medicinal and ceremonial purposes. The presence of contamination in soil, water, and air pose a major risk to Native Americans. “In particular, the biocencentration of uranium by aquatic and terrestrial plants is a primary exposure pathway for Native Americans. These plants are consumed directly by Native Americans, as well as aquatic and terrestrial animals, which are then consumed by Native Americans” (Fegadel, 2023).
In Green Victimization of Native Americans: Uranium Mining as a Form of Toxic Colonialism and Genocide, Averi R. Fegadel says, “The prevalence of poverty and unemployment among expendability, thus their lands are targeted by the U.S. government and large corporations. In 1987, approximately 50% of Native Americans live in communities with one or more uncontrolled toxic waste sites” (Fegadel, 2023).
Indigenous peoples
There have been instances of killings and evictions attributed to conflicts with mining companies. Almost a third of 227 murders in 2020 were of Indigenous peoples rights activists on the frontlines of climate change activism linked to logging, mining, large-scale agribusiness, hydroelectric dams, and other infrastructure, according to Global Witness.
Struggles over access to land define the relationship between indigenous peoples and mining.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there are issues with both evictions and a lack of compensation. There are "forced evictions taking place as companies that seek to expand industrial-scale copper and cobalt mining projects are wrecking lives" and "following protests, in 2019 Chemaf, the company responsible for the industrial mining projects, agreed to pay via the local authority US$1.5 million, but some former residents received as little as US$300." According to the US government report, "Corruption and official complicity in trafficking crimes remained significant concerns, impeding law enforcement and judicial action. Sources reported widespread complicity, including allegations that government officials directly engaged in trafficking, helped facilitate the crime, and obstructed justice. Government officials accepted bribes to overlook labor abuses, including forced labor and the worst forms of child labor, in the mining sector. Perpetrators of sexual violence, including sex trafficking, were rarely held accountable, and security forces continued to sexually abuse and exploit victims, including children, with impunity." There is little information about what citizens of DRC are doing in retaliation.
In South Africa, according to health scientist Brad Kistanasamy and their peers, their "mineral resources have produced, and continue to produce, enormous economic wealth; yet decades of colonialism, apartheid, capital flight, and challenges in the neoliberal post-apartheid era have resulted in high rates of occupational lung disease and low rates of compensation for ex-miners and their families." According to Amnesty International, "By the end of 2017, 111,166 miners had received compensation (of which 55,864 were for permanent lung impairment, and another 52,473 for tuberculosis), however 107,714 compensable claims remained unpaid." To address current lead poisoning, there is a current class action "by residents of Kabwe (Zambia) against the mining company Anglo American in South Africa. The claimants allege severe lead poisoning caused by mining operations in Kabwe. SALC and Amnesty International submit that the case represents a pivotal moment for corporate accountability and the rights of communities affected by transnational and transgenerational harm."
In Australia, the Aboriginal Bininj said mining posed a threat to their living culture and could damage sacred heritage sites. Although Australia is one of the most profitable mining countries, "Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders (henceforward referred to as Indigenous Australians) have not shared in this bounty equitably, with social and economic disadvantage exacerbated where mining activity is the greatest. As of now, "Australian restoration networks are still poorly articulated and not in the position to stimulate an inclusive sector aligned with democratic and participatory engagements with Indigenous Australians."
In the Philippines, an anti-mining movement has raised concerns regarding "the total disregard for [Indigenous communities'] ancestral land rights." According to Geographic Scientist William Holden and their peers, "Those unfamiliar with indigenous culture may mistakenly believe that mining poses minimal risks, since indigenous peoples have little income or wealth to lose and [suffer from] high unemployment," when in reality "such a view is incorrect because 'the wealth that supports the sustainability of their culture is found in institutions, environmental knowledge, local resources, and especially in land embellished with cultural meaning." Ifugao peoples' opposition to mining led a governor to proclaim a ban on mining operations in Mountain Province, Philippines.
In Brazil, more than 170 tribes organized a march to oppose controversial attempts to strip back indigenous land rights and open their territories to mining operations. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has called on Brazil's Supreme Court to uphold Indigenous land rights to prevent exploitation by mining groups and industrial agriculture. For issues such as gold mining and illegal mining, " uniform law enforcement is required to prevent the waterbed effect (when fighting miners somewhere, they pop up elsewhere); the unhinged miners have not been hinged yet. In addition, gold trading laws need to be strengthened to ensure accountability for the illegal gold trade in the Amazon.
Lack of Safety Enforcement
There is a lack of law enforcement in various countries. For example, "although South Africa has strong regulations to avoid potential mining impacts, lack of enforcement and corruption have been barriers to combating social and environmental injustices," leading to unsafe working conditions for many miners (see Safety Section). In the DRC, "more than half of the DRC's natural resource exports are not officially recorded because of tax evasion and state institutions' lack of governance capacity," and "90% of minerals come from artisanal miners," which are indigenous people. In Ghana, similar safety issues exist. This is because "inadequate monitoring of the operations and lack of regulatory enforcement by the Minerals Commission of Ghana are major contributing factors to the environmental, safety, and national security issues of the operations," implying a failure of enforcement from local authorities, similar to these other countries.
Corporate Negligence and Lack of Regulation Towards Indigenous Peoples
There have already been international loopholes that threaten the safety of indigenous miners (see safety regulations). These often exist due to "multiple factors such as colonial legacies, economic inequalities, global power imbalances, inadequate governance, regulatory weaknesses, and insufficient community participation." In these countries, mining legislation and regulations either don't include the scope of compensation for indigenous populations, or aren't enforced. For example, the Mines and Minerals Act in Zimbabwe "does not provide for direct compensation to inhabitants of Communal Lands, making them particularly vulnerable." Although there are laws against child labor in the DRC, "In the DRC cobalt belt, field research describes 'subterranean slavery' in which children descend 10–30m pits to fill sacks of ore for as little as US $1–2 per day. Violence has intensified rather than fallen since U.S. conflict-mineral legislation, with statistically significant spikes in armed incidents around mine sites," which is most likely not enforced due to financial benefit. For justice to be secured, laws need to both encapsulate justice for indigenous communities and enforce them, despite any financial incentives to do otherwise.
Protests and Current Activism
In response to unsafe working conditions and low wages, miners and local communities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have engaged in protests and labor activism, “driven by socioeconomic issues” (Manojlovic & Kabanga, 2023). Miners and local communities have organized demonstrations and strikes to demand improved safety standards, fair wages, and greater corporate accountability. These movements have also called attention to the environmental impacts of mining, including pollution and land degradation, and have sought stronger regulatory oversight. Such activism highlights the role of affected communities in advocating for labor rights and environmental protections within the global mining industry. In addition to public demonstrations, workers and advocacy groups have pushed for formal recognition of artisanal mining, the implementation of safety regulations, and increased oversight of mining operations. International organizations and civil society groups have also collaborated to promote responsible sourcing initiatives, including supply chain transparency and certification programs to reduce child labor and improve working conditions. The details of the protests in the DRC have been harshly repressed by the police, resulting in deaths and have caused people to have been evicted from their homes (Manojlovic & Kabanga, 2023). Through harsh conditions, people of the DRC have continued to show ongoing attempts to secure safer labor environments and more equitable participation in the benefits of resource extraction.
Mining and Land Rights
Mining operations often intersect with land rights in complex and sometimes contentious ways. In many countries, land ownership and mineral resource ownership are legally separated, with mineral rights usually vested in the state, while individuals or communities may own land.
This creates a situation in which communities may have legal ownership of the surface land but limited control over mineral extraction beneath it.
Customary land tenure, prevalent in many rural areas, often governs land use and inheritance.
Mining in these areas can disrupt farming, grazing, and culturally significant sites, and communities without formal titles may be vulnerable to displacement or inadequate compensation.
Records
As of 2019, Mponeng is the world's second deepest mine from ground level, reaching a depth of 4 km (2.5 mi) below ground level. The trip from the surface to the bottom of the mine takes over an hour. It is a gold mine in South Africa's Gauteng province. Previously known as Western Deep Levels #1 Shaft, the underground and surface works were commissioned in 1987. The mine is considered one of the largest gold mines in the world.
The Moab Khutsong gold mine in North West Province (South Africa) has the world's longest winding steel wire rope, which can lower workers to 3,054 metres (10,020 ft) in a single uninterrupted four-minute journey.
The deepest mine in Europe is the 16th shaft of the uranium mines in Příbram, Czech Republic, at 1,838 metres (6,030 ft). Second is Bergwerk Saar in Saarland, Germany, at 1,750 metres (5,740 ft).
The deepest open-pit mine in the world is Bingham Canyon Mine in Bingham Canyon, Utah, United States, at over 1,200 metres (3,900 ft). The largest and second-deepest open-pit copper mine in the world is Chuquicamata in northern Chile, at 900 metres (3,000 ft), which annually produces 443,000 tons of copper and 20,000 tons of molybdenum.
The deepest open-pit mine with respect to sea level is Tagebau Hambach in Germany, where the base of the pit is 299 metres (981 ft) below sea level.
The largest underground mine is Kiirunavaara Mine in Kiruna, Sweden. With 450 kilometres (280 miles) of roads, 40 million tonnes of annually produced ore, and a depth of 1,270 metres (4,170 ft), it is also one of the most modern underground mines. The deepest borehole in the world is Kola Superdeep Borehole at 12,262 metres (40,230 ft), but this is connected to scientific drilling, not mining.
Metal reserves and recycling
During the 20th century, the variety of metals used in society increased. Today, the development of major nations such as China and India, along with technological advances, fuels an ever-greater demand. The result is that metal mining activities are expanding, and more and more of the world's metal stocks are above ground in use rather than below ground as unused reserves. An example is the in-use stock of copper. Between 1932 and 1999, copper in use in the US rose from 73 kilograms (161 lb) to 238 kilograms (525 lb) per person.
95% of the energy used to make aluminium from bauxite ore is saved by using recycled material. However, levels of metal recycling are generally low. In 2010, the International Resource Panel, hosted by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), published reports on metal stocks that exist within society and their recycling rates.
The report's authors observed that the metal stocks in society can serve as substantial anthropogenic mines above ground. However, they warned that the recycling rates of some rare metals used in applications such as mobile phones, battery packs for hybrid cars, and fuel cells are so low that unless future end-of-life recycling rates are dramatically stepped up these critical metals will become unavailable for use in modern technology.
As recycling rates are low and so much metal has already been extracted, some landfill now contain higher concentrations of metal than the mines themselves. This is especially true of aluminum, used in cans, and precious metals, found in discarded electronics. Furthermore, waste after 15 years has still not broken down, so less processing would be required when compared to mining ores. A study undertaken by Cranfield University has found £360 million of metals could be mined from just four landfill sites. There is also up to 20 MJ/kg of energy in waste, potentially making the re-extraction more profitable. However, although the first landfill mine opened in Tel Aviv, Israel in 1953, little work has followed due to the abundance of accessible ores.

A mining cooperative is an association of persons that operates a mine. Mining cooperatives have been promoted as means to deal to unemployment and provide poverty alleviation. The formation of mining cooperates is recommended by the International Labour Organization as a step to eliminate child labour in artisanal mining. Mining cooperatives have been found to have often problems in addressing environmental concerns, this being attributed to low levels of knowledge among its members, plausible impunity and little development in nearby local communities.
In Bolivia and Chile
In Bolivia the spread of mining cooperatives dates to the 1930s while in Chile mining cooperatives became common in the late 1960s and early 1970s when a series of mines were reorganized as worker's cooperatives, including Dulcinea, El Morado and some mines in Andacollo. In Bolivia, about 60,000 miners are organized into cooperatives.

Mining geology is an applied science which combines the principles of economic geology and mining engineering to the development of a defined mineral resource. Mining geologists and engineers work to develop an identified ore deposit to economically extract the ore.

Mira Lloyd Dock and the Progressive Era Conservation Movement is a biography of a Pennsylvania environmentalist and conservationist, written by Susan Rimby.
Overview
Historian Susan Rimby, who holds a Ph.D. in United States history from the University of Pittsburgh, began researching the book in 2001 while serving as Scholar-in-Residency at the Pennsylvania State Archives. Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania's Center for Faculty Excellence in Scholarship and Teaching assisted her research travels for this book with two grants. Rimby is currently a Founding Dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Education at Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania.
Mira Lloyd Dock (1853–1945) was at the forefront of the Progressive Era environmental and conservation movement, and in 1901 became the first woman to serve on the Pennsylvania Forest Commission or any public forest commission. Rimby begins by stating her case on why Dock's story is relevant, framed against the background of late 19th century and early 20th century emergence of civic activism in the fields of conservation and ecology. As Dock began to receive public and institutional support for her horticulture lectures, she was elected to represent Pennsylvania at the International Congress of Women to be held that summer in London. The author weaves Dock's accomplishments around her eagerness to constantly ingest more knowledge, such as her month-long tour of Germany's forests made possible by botanist Dietrich Brandis. Rimby follows Dock's decades-long career toward the conclusion of Dock's legacies that remain today.
Reception
Kevin C. Armitage of Miami University of Ohio, in reviewing the book for the Ohio Valley History journal, noted that Rimby meticulously provided an historical framework for Dock's life that made the connection between women's suffrage, civic activism and environmental conservation. He stated that the book should inspire more scholarly output on gender's role in environmental activism.
The H-Net review by Jessica DeWitt noted that the book was light-weight on documenting the conservation movement. But otherwise, DeWitt wrote that the book's strengths were in presenting Dock's story well-framed within the historical, environmental and social times in which she lived.
Goodreads gave the book four stars out of five, and said the book created a "a vivid and accessible picture of Progressive Era conservation in the eastern United States and Dock's important role and legacy in that movement."
Detailed release information
Rimby, Susan (2012). Mira Lloyd Dock and the Progressive Era Conservation Movement. Penn State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-05823-8 – via Project MUSE.

The Montmorency Forest is an experimental forest located in the unorganized territory of Lac-Jacques-Cartier, in the La Côte-de-Beaupré Regional County Municipality, in the administrative region of Capitale-Nationale, in the province of Quebec, in Canada.
This protected forest is mainly served by the forested route 33 which connects by the south to route 175.
The main lodge located on the west shore of Lac Piché is located 56.7 kilometres (35.2 mi) north of downtown Quebec. This forestry education center is managed by the Faculty of Forestry and Geomatics from Laval University. The university received this territory – starting from an area of 66 square kilometres (25 sq mi) – from Government of Quebec in 1964 by an emphyteutic lease of 99 years. In return, it committed to developing research and teaching in various fields of the natural sciences. In 2014, the Forêt Montmorency benefited from an extension which brought its area to 397 square kilometres (153 sq mi).
The environment
Located in the Laurentian Mountains, the Montmorency forest is drained by the Montmorency River and by one of its tributaries, the Black river. There are four lakes: Lac Piché, Bédard, Laflamme and Joncas. The altitude varies between 600 and 1,000 meters (3,300 ft) with an average of 750 meters. The predominant forest stand is the fir forest white birch.
Climate
Annual precipitation exceeds 1,500 millimetres (59 in) and, in winter, the average snowfall exceeds 6 meters. The annual average temperature is 0.5-degree Celsius and there are approximately 133 frost-free days in the year. A weather station existed at 640 metres (2,100 ft) elevation from 1965 to 2001. A new station was established at 672 metres (2,205 ft) beginning in 2003. The weather box uses climate normals from the first station.
Activities
Teaching and research
The Montmorency Forest is a training place for students of the 1st cycle and an open-air laboratory for students of the second and third cycle, researchers and professors from Laval University, especially those from Center d'études de la forêt. The Main Pavilion has spaces large enough to accommodate groups in training. Research is done mainly in forestry, but also in biology and game management. Over a hundred dissertations and theses dealing with one aspect or the other of the Montmorency Forest have been deposited at the Faculty of Graduate Studies of the University Laval since the creation of the experimental station.
Sustainable development
The Montmorency Forest is exploited for its forest resources according to the principles of a versatile and sustainable management. Cuts with soil protection (CPRS) of limited dimensions are practiced gradually and irregularly, so that the forest presents a mosaic of stands of different ages. Special care is taken to protect regeneration during operations logging.
Outdoor activities
In winter, cross-country skiing is practiced from the beginning of November. The thick layer of snow also makes the forest an excellent place for snowshoeing. In summer, hiking and fishing are common activities.
Notes and references

Mount Elliott Mining Complex is a heritage-listed copper mine and smelter at Selwyn, Shire of Cloncurry, Queensland, Australia. It was designed by William Henry Corbould and built in 1908. It is also known as Mount Elliott Smelter and Selwyn. It was added to the Queensland Heritage Register on 16 September 2011.
History
The Mount Elliott Mining Complex is an aggregation of the remnants of copper mining and smelting operations from the early 20th century and the associated former mining township of Selwyn. The earliest copper mining at Mount Elliott was in 1906 with smelting operations commencing shortly after. Significant upgrades to the mining and smelting operations occurred under the management of W.H. Corbould during 1909–1910. Following these upgrades and increases in production, the Selwyn Township grew quickly and had 1500 residents by 1918. The Mount Elliott Company took over other companies on the Cloncurry field in the 1920s, including the Mount Cuthbert and Kuridala/Hampden smelters. Mount Elliott operations were taken over by Mount Isa Mines in 1943 to ensure the supply of copper during World War Two. The Mount Elliott Company was eventually liquidated in 1953.
Mount Elliott Smelter
The existence of copper in the Leichhardt River area of north western Queensland had been known since Ernest Henry discovered the Great Australia Mine in 1867 at Cloncurry. In 1899 James Elliott discovered copper on the conical hill that became Mount Elliott, but having no capital to develop the mine, he sold an interest to James Morphett, a pastoralist of Fort Constantine station near Cloncurry. Morphett, being drought stricken, in turn sold out to John Moffat of Irvinebank, the most successful mining promoter in Queensland at the time.
Plentiful capital and cheap transport were prerequisites for developing the Cloncurry field, which had stagnated for forty years. Without capital it was impossible to explore and prove ore-bodies; without proof of large reserves of wealth it was futile to build a railway; and without a railway it was hazardous to invest capital in finding large reserves of ore. The mining investor or the railway builder had to break the impasse.
In 1906–1907 copper averaged £87 a ton on the London market, the highest price for thirty years, and the Cloncurry field grew. The Great Northern railway was extended west of Richmond in 1905–1906 by the Queensland Government and mines were floated on the Melbourne Stock Exchange. At Mount Elliott a prospecting shaft had been sunk and on 1 August 1906 a Cornish boiler and winding plant were installed on the site.
Mount Elliott Limited was floated in Melbourne on 13 July 1906. In 1907 it was taken over by British and French interests and restructured. Combining with its competitor, Hampden Cloncurry Copper Mines Limited, Mount Elliott formed a special company to finance and construct the railway from Cloncurry to Malbon, Kuridala (then Friezeland) and Mount Elliott (later Selwyn). This new company then entered into an agreement with the Queensland Railways Department in July 1908.
The Selwyn railway, which was known as the "Syndicate Railway", aroused opposition in 1908 from the trade unions and Labor movement generally, who contended that railways should be State-owned. However, the Hampden-Mount Elliott Railway Bill was passed by the Queensland Parliament and assented to on 21 April 1908; construction finished in December 1910. The railway terminated at the Mount Elliott smelter.
By 1907 the main underlie shaft had been sunk and construction of the smelters was underway using a second-hand water-jacket blast furnace and converters. At this time, W.H. Corbould was appointed general manager of Mount Elliott Limited.
The second-hand blast furnace and converters were commissioned or "blown in" in May 1909, but were problematic causing hold-ups. Corbould referred to the equipment in use as being the "worst collection of worn-out junk he had ever come across". Corbould soon convinced his directors to scrap the plant and let him design new works.
Corbould was a metallurgist and geologist as well as mine/smelter manager. He foresaw a need to obtain control and thereby ensure a reliable supply of ore from a cross-section of mines in the region. He also saw a need to implement an effective strategy to manage the economies of smelting low-grade ore. Smelting operations in the region were made difficult by the technical and economic problems posed by the deterioration in the grade of ore. Corbould resolved the issue by a process of blending ores with different chemical properties, increasing the throughput capacity of the smelter and by championing the unification of smelting operations in the region. In 1912, Corbould acquired Hampden Consols Mine at Kuridala for Mount Elliott Limited, followed with the purchases of other small mines in the district.
Walkers Limited of Maryborough was commissioned to manufacture a new 200 long tons (200 t) water jacket furnace for the smelters. An air compressor and blower for the smelters were constructed in the powerhouse and an electric motor and dynamo provided power for the crane and lighting for the smelter and mine.
The new smelter was blown in September 1910, a month after the first train arrived, and it ran well, producing 2,040 long tons (2,070 t) of blister copper by the end of the year. The new smelting plant made it possible to cope with low-grade sulphide ores at Mount Elliott. The use of 1,000 long tons (1,000 t) of low-grade sulphide ores bought from the Hampden Consols Mine in 1911 made it clear that if a supply of higher sulphur ore could be obtained and blended, performance and economy would improve. Accordingly, the company bought a number of smaller mines in the district in 1912.
Corbould mined with cut and fill stoping but a young Mines Inspector condemned the system, ordered it dismantled and replaced with square set timbering. In 1911, after gradual movement in stopes on the No.3 level, the smelter was closed for two months. Nevertheless, 5,447 long tons (5,534 t) of blister copper was produced in 1911, rising to 6,690 long tons (6,800 t) in 1912 - the company's best year. Many of the surviving structures at the site were built at this time.
Troubles for Mount Elliott started in 1913. In February, a fire at the Consols Mine closed it for months. In June, a thirteen-week strike closed the whole operation, severely depleting the workforce. The year 1913 was also bad for industrial accidents in the area, possibly due to inexperienced people replacing the strikers. Nevertheless, the company paid generous dividends that year.
At the end of 1914 smelting ceased for more than a year due to shortage of ore. Although 3,200 long tons (3,300 t) of blister copper was produced in 1913, production fell to 1,840 long tons (1,870 t) in 1914 and the workforce dwindled to only 40 men. For the second half of 1915 and early 1916 the smelter treated ore railed south from Mount Cuthbert. At the end of July 1916 the smelting plant at Selwyn was dismantled except for the flue chambers and stacks. A new furnace with a capacity of 500 long tons (510 t) per day was built, a large amount of second-hand equipment was obtained and the converters were increased in size.
After the enlarged furnace was commissioned in June 1917, continuing industrial unrest retarded production which amounted to only 1,000 long tons (1,000 t) of copper that year. The point of contention was the efficiency of the new smelter which processed twice as much ore while employing fewer men. The company decided to close down the smelter in October and reduce the size of the furnace, the largest in Australia, from 6.5 to 5.5 metres (21 to 18 ft). In the meantime the price of copper had almost doubled from 1916 due to wartime consumption of munitions.
The new furnace commenced on 16 January 1918 and 77,482 long tons (78,725 t) of ore were smelted yielding 3,580 long tons (3,640 t) of blister copper which were sent to the Bowen refinery before export to Britain. Local coal and coke supply was a problem and materials were being sourced from the distant Bowen Colliery. The smelter had a good run for almost a year except for a strike in July and another in December, which caused Corbould to close down the plant until New Year. In 1919, following relaxation of wartime controls by the British Metal Corporation, the copper price plunged from about £110 per ton at the start of the year to £75 per ton in April, dashing the company's optimism regarding treatment of low grade ores. The smelter finally closed after two months operation and most employees were laid off.
For much of the period 1919 to 1922, Corbould was in England trying to raise capital to reorganise the company's operations but he failed and resigned from the company in 1922. The Mount Elliott Company took over the assets of the other companies on the Cloncurry field in the 1920s - Mount Cuthbert in 1925 and Kuridala in 1926. Mount Isa Mines bought the Mount Elliott plant and machinery, including the three smelters, in 1943 for £2,300, enabling them to start copper production in the middle of the Second World War. The Mount Elliott Company was finally liquidated in 1953.
In 1950 A.E. Powell took up the Mount Elliott Reward Claim at Selwyn and worked close to the old smelter buildings. An open cut mine commenced at Starra, south of Mount Elliott and Selwyn, in 1988 and is Australia's third largest copper producer producing copper-gold concentrates from flotation and gold bullion from carbon-in-leach processing.
Profitable copper-gold ore bodies were recently proved at depth beneath the Mount Elliott smelter and old underground workings by Cyprus Gold Australia Pty Ltd. These deposits were subsequently acquired by Arimco Mining Pty Ltd for underground development which commenced in July 1993. A decline tunnel portal, ore and overburden dumps now occupy a large area of the Maggie Creek valley south-west of the smelter which was formerly the site of early miner's camps.
Selwyn Township
In 1907, the first hotel, run by H. Williams, was opened at the site. The township was surveyed later, around 1910, by the Queensland Mines Department. The town was to be situated north of the mine and smelter operations adjacent the railway, about 1.5 kilometres (0.93 mi) distant. It took its name from the nearby Selwyn Ranges which were named, during Burke's expedition, after the Victorian Government Geologist, Alfred Richard Cecil Selwyn. The town has also been known by the name of Mount Elliott, after the nearby mines and smelter.
Many of the residents either worked at the Mount Elliott Mine and Smelter or worked in the service industries which grew around the mining and smelting operations. Little documentation exists about the everyday life of the town's residents. Surrounding sheep and cattle stations, however, meant that meat was available cheaply and vegetables grown in the area were delivered to the township by horse and cart. Imported commodities were, however, expensive.
By 1910 the town had four hotels. There was also an aerated water manufacturer, three stores, four fruiterers, a butcher, baker, saddler, garage, police, hospital, banks, post office (officially from 1906 to 1928, then unofficially until 1975) and a railway station. There was even an orchestra of ten players in 1912. The population of Selwyn rose from 1000 in 1911 to 1500 in 1918, before gradually declining.
Description
Mount Elliott Smelter
Mount Elliott Smelter is located in Cloncurry Shire, approximately one kilometre south of the former township of Selwyn, and 95 kilometres (59 mi) south of Cloncurry. The main processing infrastructure and remains are centralised on the northern side of the low hill known as Mount Elliott.
Immediately north of the main processing complex is a shallow basin formed by natural rises in ground. Within this basin lay the powerhouse and boiler house machinery beds, ore tunnel, beehive kiln, the lower condenser area and railway embankments.
To the east of the central complex are the remains of an assay office, furnaces, one possible and one identifiable explosives magazine, the upper condenser bank, tank stands, and the remains of a substantial residence.
To the south-west, on the central low hill, are the remains of a winder engine machine-bed, a square brick stack that served the boilers of the winder complex, and the single remaining bed and footings of the primary ore crusher.
Further west on low ridges are the remains of a strong room, office, stone tank stand and smithy.
Selwyn Township
The Selwyn Township is located at the northern end of a valley running south to Mount Elliott Smelter which is about 1.5 kilometres (0.93 mi) distant. All buildings have been removed and the evidence of the township now comprises garden plots, cement surfaces and corrugated iron water tanks.
The site of the Union Hotel remains identifiable and the timber stumps of the stationmaster's house, the railway formation and surviving timber sleepers are among the most visible remains. The railway embankment follows the eastern side of the valley between the town and smelter passing several miners' hut sites comprising rough stone walls, and benched surfaces with stone retaining walls.
Identifiable sites in the valley include a cement surface formerly under the high-set school building, the police station site, and the original smelter site at the base of a hill on the western side of the valley.
The town cemetery, about 200 metres (660 ft) south-east of the town, contains about fifteen headstones in separate sections for Catholics and Protestants. All but one headstone are from Melrose & Fenwick of Townsville. The grave sites include three women, a returned Anzac accidentally killed in the mine, a man who died of injuries in the local hospital, and a miner from Mount Cobalt who was buried in 1925 after Selwyn was almost deserted.
Heritage listing
Mount Elliott Mining Complex was listed on the Queensland Heritage Register on 16 September 2011 having satisfied the following criteria.
The Mount Elliott Mining Complex, incorporating the remnants of the Mount Elliott Mine, Smelter, a range of associated infrastructure, scattered archaeological artefacts, the abandoned town of Selwyn and its associated cemetery, has the potential to provide important information on aspects of Queensland's history particularly early copper smelter practices and technologies, the full range of activities peripheral to those base operations and, importantly, the people who lived and worked in this complex historic mining landscape.
The Mount Elliott Mining Complex has sufficient archaeological integrity and diversity in its assemblage to facilitate detailed studies which would reveal the largely undocumented social and cultural aspects of the occupation and use of the mine, smelter and Selwyn Township areas. Important research questions could focus on, but are not limited to, cultural identity and ethnicity, socioeconomic status, individual and collective living conditions, and individual adaptations to the remoteness and harshness of the local environment.
Archaeological investigations within the Mount Elliott Mining Complex have potential to reveal specific details about the function and use of the area that complement and augment archival records. Investigations of the remnant mining and smelting infrastructure may help answer important research questions relating to mining and smelting operations including, but not limited to:
the design and operation of an early primary ore-processing plant, base metals mine and smelting operation in Queensland
adaptation of work practices due to remoteness, harshness and the local environment
fundamental and influential changes to copper mining and smelting practice in Queensland initiated by Mount Elliott's manager W.R. Corbould (1907–1922), especially the use of more efficient and economical production techniques compared to other similar operations
The Mount Elliott Mining Complex is an important component of a broader historic mining landscape as operations at Mount Elliott helped initiate extractive and primary processing industries in the Cloncurry region and north-west Queensland generally. The remnant infrastructure, mining artefacts, and the remains of the mining township of Selwyn have potential for important comparative material to other mining sites in the region, particularly the nearby Hampden Company Smelter at Kuridala and Mount Cuthbert Township and Smelter. Archaeological investigations at the Mount Elliott Mining Complex may reveal new information that expands our understanding of such enterprises and on the everyday lives of the people living and working at such sites across Queensland.

A multiple hearth furnace also known as a vertical calciner, is used for continuous preparation and calcining of materials.
Working
The multiple hearth furnaces consist of several circular hearths or kilns superimposed on each other. Material is fed from the top and is moved by the action of rotating "rabble arms", and the revolving mechanical rabbles attached to the arms move over the surface of each hearth to continuously shift the ore. The arms are attached to a rotating central shaft that passes through the center of the roaster. As the material is moved, the ore that is charged at the top hearth gradually moves downward as it passes through windows in the floor of each hearth or through alternate passages around the shaft and the periphery until it finally emerges at the bottom.
Gas
The oxidizing gases flow upward, i.e., counter-current to the descending charge. In a well-insulated roaster, external heating is unnecessary except when the charge is highly moist. The hearth at the top of the roaster dries and heats the charge. Ignition and oxidation of the charge occur lower down.
Variables
The hearths may be individually heated and the number, temperature, rotation rate, and size of each hearth determine the residence time and conditions for the calcining powder in order to achieve the desired final properties.
Structure of furnace
The individual hearths are lined with refractory brick, and the rabble arms are typically a force-cooled metal alloy. The entire structure is enclosed in a cylindrical brick-lined steel shell.

Mycoforestry is an ecological forest management system implemented to enhance forest ecosystems and plant communities, by introducing the mycorrhizal and saprotrophic fungi. Mycoforestry is considered a type of permaculture and can be implemented as a beneficial component of an agroforestry system. It can enhance the yields of tree crops and produce edible mushrooms, an economically valuable product. By integrating plant-fungal associations into a forestry management system, native forests can be preserved, wood waste can be recycled back into the ecosystem, carbon sequestration can be increased, planted restoration sites are enhanced, and the sustainability of forest ecosystems are improved.
Mycoforestry is an alternative to the practice of clearcutting, which removes dead wood from forests, thereby diminishing nutrient availability and reducing soil depth.
Selection of fungal species
According to Paul Stamets, the first principle for the creation of a mycoforestry system is to utilize native fungal species. Implementing a mycoforestry system provides the potential of improving restoration efforts and the possibility of economic gain through mushroom cropping and harvesting. However to utilize native fungal flora, first the relationships between present fungal species and growth substrate, and habitat need to be studied.
A simple way to introduce a mycoforestry system and enhance out-plantings for crops and forest restoration sites is to "use mycorrhizal spore inoculum when replanting forest lands." For this process it is best to match native trees with native mycorrhizal fungi. This method keeps and will promote the functioning of the native ecosystem, and native biodiversity.
It is assumed in a functioning forest ecosystem an underground mycelial network persists even if no fruiting bodies are visible. A period of disappearance of mushrooms from an area should not cause alarm. In order to trigger the formation of fruiting bodies, many fungal species require specific environmental conditions. Most species of fungi do not fruit year round.
Mycoforestry is an emergent scientific field and practice. Until broadly standardized protocols are created and perfected, the collection of both current and historical ecological site conditions will improve the success of the project. Therefore, a survey of fungal relations at the site under both prime and poor conditions is beneficial to implementation of a mycoforestry system.
Saprotrophic fungi
The second principle is to promote saprotrophic fungi in the environment. Saprophytic fungi are crucial to mycoforestry systems because these are the primary composers breaking down wood and returning nutrients to the soil for use by the rest of the forest ecosystem. This can be accomplished through inoculation of wood debris at site. Spored oils (biodegradable oils containing fungal spores) can be used in chainsaws when problematic or invasive hardwood requires felling. This method is a simple means to inoculate a tree. Additionally plug spawn can be implemented and injected into wood mass again prompting colonization by the selected fungus. Eventually repeated colonization efforts should not be necessary as many fungal life forms are strong and will spread and sustain in the soil on their own.
In management of the mycoforestry system, it is important that dead wood be in contact with the ground. This allows fungus to reach up from the soil and decompose fallen wood releasing nutrients at a much quicker rate then if the wood is left standing. Additionally, it is important to leave dead wood on site for decomposition back into the soil. This philosophy is similarly based to the fact that clearcutting of a forest reduces soil nutrients and thickness.
Beneficial fungal interactions
The third principle is to implement species known to benefit plant species. These are commonly mycorrhizal fungus that form long term associations with plants, often extending inside of plants roots, acting as an additional root system, and improving absorption of nutrients and water.
Utilizing mushroom species that attract insects could be a useful source of fish food. This practice makes the mycoforestry a larger system. Unlike most agriculture systems it helps the environment in a number of ways. It ties all biological aspects of the environment together, creating sustainable living and food production as well as sustainable fisheries similar to the ancient Hawaiian Ahupua'a, which utilized sustainable all portions of the land for environmental and food security.
Additionally fungal species can be implemented that compete with disease-causing agents like Armillaria root rots, to provide long term protection of the forestry system.
Additionally, the implementation of an agroforestry system performs mycoremediation and mycofiltration activities, cleaning up toxins and restoring the environment.

NL Industries (NYSE: NL), formerly known as the National Lead Company, is a lead smelting company currently based in Houston, Texas. National Lead was one of the 12 original stocks included in the Dow Jones Industrial Average at the time of its creation on May 26, 1896.
History
It began business in Philadelphia in 1772. The name "National Lead Company" was used since 1891 after a series of mergers. National Lead changed its name to NL Industries in 1971.
California lead paint liability case
NL Industries has encountered legal problems based on their long history of selling lead paint. Exposure to lead paint can cause numerous health and developmental problems in children and adults, and its use has been banned or restricted in many countries.
In January 2014, the Santa Clara County Superior Court ruled that NL Industries, along with Sherwin-Williams and ConAgra, were jointly and severally liable for $1.15 billion, to be paid into a lead paint abatement fund to be used to remove lead paint from older housing. The judge ruled that the paint companies manufactured, marketed, and sold lead paint without disclosing the health risks to the consumers in spite of "actual and constructive knowledge that it was harmful".
The disposition of The People v. ConAgra Grocery Products Company et al. in the California 6th Appellate District Court on November 14, 2017, is that: ... the judgment is reversed, and the matter is remanded to the trial court with directions to (1) recalculate the amount of the abatement fund to limit it to the amount necessary to cover the cost of remediating pre-1951 homes, and (2) hold an evidentiary hearing regarding the appointment of a suitable receiver. The Plaintiff shall recover its costs on appeal.
On February 14, 2018, the California Supreme Court denied the defendants' request for review, sending the case back to the trial court as ordered by the Appellate Court.
NL Industries settled its part of the suit in May, 2018 with a payment of $60 million and a pledge to stop supporting the ConAgra and Sherwin-Williams backed ballot measure proposed for the November, 2018 ballot
National Lead and Dutch Boy Paints
In 1907, National Lead entered the consumer market for titanium paints, creating a product line under the name "Dutch Boy". Dutch Boy paints competed with other brands that contained mineral products supplied by National Lead. The "Dutch Boy Painter", which was created by Lawrence Carmichael Earle, became National Lead's symbol for many years.
NL Industries sold off the Dutch Boy brand in 1980 to Sherwin-Williams, two years after the CPSC's directive banning the manufacturing of lead housepaint went into effect.
CompX International
CompX International Inc. is one of the largest manufacturers of security products and recreational marine components in the world. Located in Dallas, Texas, CompX International Inc. is also a subsidiary of NL Industries, Inc. The business of the company is divided into three segments: Security Products, Furniture Components and Marine Components. Their products are designed to meet the high-end applications. CompX International Inc. offers its products through original equipment manufacturers and distributors.
History
Based in Dallas, Texas, CompX was founded to open business on August 4, 1993.
In March 1998, CompX International Inc. completed its initial public offering, making it a public company with stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol of CIX.
In 1999, CompX International moved the corporate headquarters from Mauldin, South Carolina, to Houston.
On Jan 11, 2000, CompX International Inc. acquired Chicago Lock Co. successfully for about $9.2 million in cash, which was borrowed under its existing credit facility.
In May 2002, CompX International achieved an agreement to close its Dallas corporate office.
In September 2004, NL Industries completed the acquisition of 68% of CompX International for $168.6 million.
In December 2012, CompX International Inc. sold its Furniture Components operations to Knape & Vogt Manufacturing Company for approximately $59 million in cash.
Leadership
The main officers of the company are listed as follows:
David Bowers - President, chief executive officer
Jim Brown - Chief Financial Officer

A national forest monitoring system (NFMS) is a country's institutional and technical arrangement for monitoring forests and producing information for decision-making and reporting, as described by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
In the context of REDD+, Decision 11/CP.19 under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), adopted as part of the Warsaw Framework for REDD+, encourages developing countries undertaking REDD+ activities to establish NFMSs that are transparent and consistent and that draw on both remote sensing and ground-based forest inventory approaches, as appropriate to national circumstances. The Global Forest Observations Initiative (GFOI) sets out methods for integrating satellite and ground-based observations for estimating emissions and removals from forests in this reporting context.
A NFMS brings together institutional arrangements (such as roles, coordination, and data stewardship) with technical methods for data collection, management, quality assurance, and dissemination of results, as set out in FAO publications and by the UN-REDD Programme. NFMSs can produce outputs such as time series of forest area and change, maps, and estimates of biomass or carbon stocks, with accompanying documentation and uncertainty information. These outputs can support land-use greenhouse-gas inventories prepared using methods from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and can contribute to periodic forest assessments such as FAO's Global Forest Resources Assessment (FRA).
Background
NFMSs were developed to support national and international reporting on forest area and change, including reporting under REDD+ and broader forest-related climate reporting where countries provide information on forests and, where relevant, estimates of greenhouse-gas emissions and removals associated with forests and land-use change (see also Deforestation and climate change).
Studies using FAO's Global Forest Resources Assessment (FRA) reporting have examined changes in national forest monitoring capacities over time. An assessment of 99 tropical countries using FRA data for 2005, 2010, and 2015 reported increases in the area covered by “good to very good” remote-sensing-based forest-area-change monitoring and in forest-inventory capacities, while carbon-pool reporting capacities improved less, and it highlighted continued capacity-development needs. A later global assessment covering 236 countries and territories reported increases between FRA 2005 and FRA 2020 in the number of countries with “good to very good” capacities for monitoring forest area using remote sensing (from 55 to 99) and using national forest inventories (from 48 to 102).
Design and outputs
FAO's voluntary guidelines and UN-REDD materials treat a NFMS as both an organisational setup and a technical workflow. On the organisational side, a NFMS typically assigns responsibilities across one or more national institutions for tasks such as remote-sensing analysis, field inventories, data custody, and quality assurance, supported by coordination and data-sharing arrangements that allow results to be reproduced and reviewed over time.
On the technical side, these sources link NFMS design to the use of national forest definitions and classification systems for monitoring and reporting, and to the combination of satellite-based mapping of forest area and change with ground-based measurements (such as national forest inventories) used to estimate forest attributes, including biomass and carbon stocks. They also emphasise data management and archiving (including metadata), documented quality assurance and quality control procedures, and reporting workflows that produce maps, summary statistics, and supporting documentation suitable for national use and international reporting.
Reporting and uses
Decision 11/CP.19 under the UNFCCC encourages countries undertaking REDD+ activities to use NFMSs to support transparent and consistent monitoring and reporting, drawing on both remote sensing and ground-based forest inventory approaches as appropriate to national circumstances. In REDD+ results-based reporting, UNFCCC documentation treats having a national forest monitoring system and an assessed forest reference emission level and/or forest reference level as elements associated with eligibility for results-based payments.
The GFOI describes how NFMS outputs can be used as inputs to greenhouse-gas reporting for the land-use sector, including the development of area-change data (often referred to as activity data) and estimates of emissions and removals aligned with IPCC inventory methods. FAO publications also present NFMS outputs as inputs to national decision-making and to broader forest assessments and reporting products, including the Global Forest Resources Assessment.
Several international initiatives associated with REDD+ have also published technical documents intended to support NFMS design and implementation, including UN-REDD material on monitoring, measurement, reporting, and verification in the REDD+ context. The Global Observations of Forest Cover and Land-use Dynamics (GOFC-GOLD) sourcebook is a technical manual that compiles methods and procedures for monitoring and reporting anthropogenic greenhouse-gas emissions and removals associated with deforestation and changes in forest carbon stocks, incorporating NFMSs.
Challenges and limitations
Academic literature on REDD+ monitoring and measurement, reporting, and verification discusses constraints related to institutional capacity and sustained resourcing, including the need for coordination across agencies responsible for remote sensing, field inventories, and greenhouse-gas reporting. Maintaining consistent methods and organisational arrangements over time while improving data and methods can affect the comparability of time series and the interpretation of reported results.
Comparative assessments based on FAO FRA reporting have also pointed to uneven capacity across NFMS components over time, and to the need for continued capacity development and regular updates to maintain systems. Methodological documents emphasise uncertainties in estimates derived from both remote sensing and field measurements, and the need for documented quality assurance and quality control and accuracy assessment when integrating datasets and producing estimates for reporting.

Natural beech wood is a beech wood, that is able to replenish and sustain itself on its own.
Beech is a valued timber, but most beech woods require human intervention to replace old trees, since the young trees are not able to survive at all, or at a rate that sustains the beech population over time. There can be various reasons for this condition. Heavy forest floor coverage of other plants in the spring, shadowing the young beech-shoots, is a common cause. Abundance of nutrient-rich soils will also be difficult to handle for beech woods in the long run.
A natural beech wood has beech trees of all ages, including fallen and dead trees. Other tree species might be mixed in, but not to a degree that threatens the dominant beech.
The term is also used for other tree species, such as 'natural oak wood', 'natural birch wood', etc..
Natural beech wood forests
Among examples of natural beech wood forests are:
Cwm Clydach National Nature Reserve in southeastern Wales
Marselisborg Forests in Denmark
Serrahn Hills in northeastern Germany
The slopes of the Harz range in northern Germany
Hainich National Park in central Germany
Voděradské bučiny National Nature Reserve in the Czech Republic
Stužica in Slovakia, one of Europes last primeval beech forests
Carpathian Biosphere Reserve in southwestern Ukraine
Threats
Agricultural practices can often change the original soil-compositions so much, that the specific natural woodland type once associated with the local area, will change too. This change is almost irreversible. This condition has now affected most of Europe.
Local or global climate changes can also have a profound effect on what kind of natural woodland can grow and survive in a specific area.
European beech is usually more susceptible to climatic changes than soil-composition and the current global climate change are found to affect the geographical distribution of natural beech wood habitats.
Misunderstandings and confusions
The term "natural" is often confusingly used as a synonym for "primeval". While primeval woodlands that still exist, are indeed natural, natural woodlands do not have to be primeval per se. Secondary or re-established woodlands can also be natural; it is just a matter of whether a given forest type is able to sustain and replace itself on its own – i.e. if the climatic and geological conditions for a given forest type are present or not. These conditions can be objectively determined, and do not depend on the "test of time" exclusively.
The term "semi-natural" is sometimes used to describe any natural woodland, that is not strictly primeval in origin.

Nature therapy, sometimes referred to as ecotherapy, grounding, or earthing, is a practice that describes a broad group of techniques or treatments using nature to improve mental or physical health. Various types of nature therapy include forest therapy, forest bathing, shinrin-yoku, and Sami Lok. Spending time in nature has various physiological benefits such as relaxation and stress reduction. Additionally, it can enhance cardiovascular health and reduce risks of high blood pressure.
Recent studies also emphasized its role in supporting mental well-being by improving attention, emotional balance, and overall mood stability.
These effects are usually linked to the body's natural stress recovery process, in which contact with nature decreases cortisol levels and heart rate.
History
Scientists in the 1950s looked into the reasons humans chose to spend time in nature. There is relatively recent history of the term Shinrin-yoku (森林浴) or 'forest bathing' gaining momentum as a term and concept within American culture; the term 'forest bathing' and Shrinrin-yoku was first popularized in Japan by the former head of the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries, Tomohide Akiyama, in 1982 to encourage more people to visit the forests.
This initiative was created to promote relaxation and reduce stress among Japan's urban population during the time of a rapid industrialization.
Several countries, including Finland and South Korea, later created national programs highlighting preventative and therapeutic health benefits tied to regular time in nature.
Today, nature therapy continues to develop as an interdisciplinary field, connecting insights from public health, environmental science, as well as psychology.
Health effects
Mood
Nature therapy has a is associated with reducing stress and improving a person's mood. Even a small amount of interaction with nature, such as having a tree outside one's home in urban communities, is linked to human wellbeing and promote mental health. This may be due to aesthetic reasons, encouragement of physical activity, or general feelings of connection to nature, where the increased proximity to nature creates higher feelings of connectivity.
Newer research additionally implies that children are becoming persistent, expanding their stress management, and retaining efficient coping skills every day by participating in nature-based programs.
Studies also show that sounds considered natural, like flowing water, birdsongs etc, have been linked to reduced blood pressure, a calmer heart rate, and a better mood.
Forest therapy has been linked to some physiological benefits as indicated by neuroimaging and the profile of mood states psychological test.
Stress and depression
Interaction with nature is associated with lower stress and depressive symptoms. Forest therapy might help stress management for all age groups.
A quantitative literature review discovered that forest bathing, outdoor learning, and other forest-based practices are related to decreased stress levels and overall improvement in emotional satisfaction in several different demographic groups.
Social horticulture could help with depression and other mental health problems of PTSD, abuse, lonely elderly people, drug or alcohol addicts, blind people, and other people with special needs. Nature therapy could also improve self-management, self-esteem, social relations and skills, socio-political awareness and employability. Nature therapy could reduce aggression and improve relationship skills.
Sounds of nature alone can be enough to affect relaxation and enhance positive emotions while reducing negative emotions, including depression and anger. Perceiving nature can lower stress levels and aid in recovery for diastolic and systolic blood pressures.
There is also evidence that implies if participation in nature-based activities is practiced consistently, it can lead to better and more persistent psychological benefits in comparison to brief exposure.
Other possible benefits
Nature therapy could help with general medical recovery, pain reduction, Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, dementia, obesity, and vitamin D deficiency. Interactions with nature environments enhance social connections, stewardship, sense of place, and increase environmental participation. Connecting with nature also addresses needs such as intellectual capacity, emotional bonding, creativity, and imagination. Overall, there seems to be benefits to time spent in nature including memory, cognitive flexibility, and attention control.
Research also suggests that childhood experience in nature are crucial for children in their daily lives as it contributes to several developmental outcomes and various domains of their well-being. Essentially, these experiences also foster an intrinsic care for nature. Studies suggest that the mental health benefits of nature may depend on how different cultures understand and value the human relationship with nature, meaning the effects can vary across communities.
Spending time outdoors can also help people feel more connected to their community, especially when activities are done in shared public spaces or group programs.
Nature therapy is also considered accessible and low-cost, since it can be practiced in nearby parks, community gardens, or other public outdoor spaces without requiring specialized equipment.
Nature-based programs can strengthen cooperation and social interaction, as shared outdoor activities often involve communication, teamwork, and mutual trust.
Additionally, social and therapeutic horticulture programs have been found to reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression, implying that regular, guided interaction with plants may support emotional well-being.
Criticism
Recent reviews have noted that results often vary depending on study design and population, which makes it difficult to measure long-term effects of nature-based therapies with consistency.
A 2012 systematic review study showed inconclusive results related to the methodology used in studies. Spending time in forests demonstrated positive health effects, but not enough to generate clinical practice guidelines or demonstrate causality.
Other scholars have noted that the growing popularity of nature-based therapies sometimes leads to overgeneralized claims, where emotional or cultural meanings of nature are emphasized more than scientific evidence.
Additionally, there are concerns from researchers expressing that time spent in nature as a form of regenerative therapy is highly personal and entirely unpredictable. Nature can be harmed in the process of human interaction.
While there is growing interest in using nature for mental health treatment, experts warn that more randomized and controlled studies are needed to confirm these effects scientifically.
Some reviews also highlight that many studies rely on self-reported feelings instead of objective measurements, which can make the results less reliable.
Researchers have also noted that some nature-based studies use very small sample sizes, which limits how confidently the results can be applied to larger populations.
Governmental support and professionalization
In Finland, researchers recommend spending about five hours a month in nature as a preventative health measure, based on studies suggesting that regular outdoor time can lower risks of depression and other stress-related issues. South Korea's approach is more therapeutic, focusing on structured nature-based programs designed to support firefighters with post-traumatic stress disorder. Canada uses a medical-prescription model, where physicians can formally "prescribe nature" to encourage patients to spend more time outdoors for both physical and mental health reasons. Starting in 2019, general practitioners in the United Kingdom are referring patients to a program called Dose of Nature, which has been funded by the National Health Service, local governments and foundations. It boasts a recovery rate of 64% for its first 1500 patients, compared to a 50% rate for talk therapy as well as a higher reliable improvement rate.
Several national health agencies have also begun funding research to test how structured nature-based programs can support public health, especially for stress related conditions.
Some governments have partnered with environmental organizations to create certified training for nature-therapy practitioners, aiming to standardized skills and ensure safer program delivery.
Government have expanded training programs for teachers and youth workers to integrate nature-based practices into educational and community settings, reflecting growing recognition of their developmental benefits.

Naval stores refers to the industry that produces various chemicals collected from conifers. The term was originally applied to the compounds used in building and maintaining wooden sailing ships. Presently, the naval stores industry are used to manufacture certain kinds of soaps as well as components of paint, varnish, shoe polish, lubricants, linoleum, and roofing materials.
History
The concept of naval stores came into existence during the Age of Sail. Wooden sailing ships, which were the primary form of long-distance transportation during the early modern period, required specialised materials to build and maintain. Demand for these materials across Europe and its colonies resulted in a global industry coming into existence to produce them.
The term naval stores references "[a]rticles or materials used in shipping or in the navy",
and covered a wide range of supplies essential for shipping.
European-style sailing ships required naval stores such as hemp,
flax
and resins for making and maintaining sails and ropes and for waterproofing; with the decline of the age of sail, the phrase "naval stores" has come to involve a relatively greater emphasis on resins from conifers.
The European colonisation of the Americas resulted in American colonies being used to produce naval stores which were sent to Europe. Beginning in 1608, cargoes of pine pitch, used to waterproof sailing ships, were sent from the English colony of Virginia to England.
By the 17th century, most of England's forests had been cut down for use as lumber or firewood, causing problems for the expanding Royal Navy, which required ever-increasing quantities of wood and naval stores amidst conflict with European nations. The English turned to importing naval stores from Sweden, but this proved infeasible when the Swedish naval stores industry was placed under the monopoly of a single company which sharply increased their prices. This occurred at a time period when many European nations were expanding their navies, leading to an increase in demand for naval stores, causing prices to rise as they became more difficult to source.
Such difficulties led English authorities to increasingly source naval stores from England's North American colonies. In 1705, the Parliament of England passed the Importation Act 1704, which required the Royal Navy to pay inflated prices for naval stores from the colonies in an effect to encourage the development of the colonial naval stores industry. Attempts to build such an industry in New York and New England proved largely unsuccessful due to the higher profitability of other industries and colonists not wanting to "take on the messy work of making tar and pitch." However, the Southern Colonies, in particular the Carolinas, successfully developed a naval stores industry; by the 1770s, North Carolina's most important industry was producing naval stores.
When the American War of Independence and tensions in Europe started to threaten to interfere with traditional supplies, British naval interests turned their attention to prospective sources in other colonies and potential colonies: India and Australasia, especially Norfolk Island and New Zealand..
Zallen tells in detail how turpentine (and rosin) are produced as naval stores. Pine trees especially in North Carolina were tapped for sap which was doubly distilled to make turpentine and rosin (aka resin)–hence the name tar heels. The trees were scored with a ledge called a “box” to collect the sap. Large numbers of slaves were used to score the trees, collect and process the sap. Zallen describes this as industrial slavery–different from the more common vision of slaves in agriculture. By the 1840s camphine, a blend of turpentine and grain alcohol, became the dominant lamp fuel in the US. [Zallen prefers the camphene spelling.]
The pine trees of North Carolina were well suited to camphine production. The business also provided additional need for slaves as production expanded. Backwoods became more productive. Slaves were often leased in winter when agriculture was slower. The value of many was protected by life insurance. Wilmington, NC became a center of the camphene industry. In cities, gaslighting was also available, but used by the upper classes. Camphine was the fuel of the average family.
Zallen reports that after Ft. Sumter, turpentine producers were cut off from major markets. Emancipation left them without manpower to collect and process turpentine. The camps were flammable. Many were burned in William Tecumseh Sherman’s march from Savannah, Georgia to Goldsboro, NC. Congress also imposed taxes on alcohol to pay for the Civil War. That made camphine more costly than kerosene. Kerosene, first produced as coal oil, became abundant after the discovery of oil in Pennsylvania.
The major producers of naval stores in the 19th and 20th century were the United States and France, where Napoleon encouraged planting of pines in areas of sand dunes. In the 1920s the United States exported eleven million gallons of spirits. By 1927, France exported about 20 percent of the world's resin.
Organizational aspects
Once, large operations, known as "factors," controlled huge tracts of forests, some in the hundreds of thousands of acres, which they leased to smaller "operators," and also advanced them capital, usually in the form of tools and other equipment and goods with which to operate. The operators satisfied their debt to the factors by returning the produce, barrels of resin. The name "Factors Walk" on the riverfront in Savannah, Georgia, commemorates an area on the Savannah River harbor where thousands of barrels of produce were collected for transshipment. Between 1880 and 1920, Savannah was the largest port for naval stores products and continued to set the world price of naval stores until 1950.
Naval stores also included cordage, mask, pitch and tar. These materials were used for water- and weather-proofing wooden ships. were traditionally used for Masts, spars, and cordage needed protecting, and hulls made of wood required a flexible material, insoluble in water, to seal the spaces between planks. Pine pitch was often mixed with fibers like hemp to caulk spaces which might otherwise leak.
After the age of wooden ships
With the demise of wooden ships, those uses of pine resin ended, but the former naval stores industry remained vigorous as new products created new markets. First extensively described by Frederick Law Olmsted in his book A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States (1856), the naval stores industry was one of the economic mainstays of the southeastern United States until the late 20th century. Despite a rapid decline of the gum naval stores industry in the last quarter of the 20th century, a few places in the southeastern United States still rely on it as a major part of their livelihood.
Industry today
The gum naval stores industry steeply declined beginning in the 1960s. As of 2001 in the U.S., only one large-scale facility (begun as Filtered Rosin Products) in Baxley, Georgia, continues in operation, serving the remaining naval stores producers in the surrounding area. Gradually, the method of tapping trees to obtain naval stores products has become overshadowed by industries which yield these products as byproducts of other operations.
Processing
Gum naval stores cultivation
The labor-intensive method of extracting pine resin from the trees (the raw gum)—tapping the trees—vaguely resembles that used in traditional rubber and maple syrup production. In one method, the tree is gashed with an inch-wide curved blade, called a "hack," to remove all of the bark down through the cambium layer. An angled piece of galvanized tin is then placed below the eight-inch-long, one-inch-wide gash (also known as "the streak") to direct the oozing sap into a quart-sized rectangular cup fixed to the tree. Each new "streak" is put onto the tree above the preceding one, and gradually a vertical "cat face" more than thirty inches in height was formed. Through the mid-twentieth century, a "puller," a type of hack that had a long handle, was used to extend the streak up the tree to a height of more than seven feet.
Separation techniques
Today naval stores are recovered from the tall oil byproduct stream of Kraft process pulping of pines in the US, though tapping of living pines remains common in other parts of the world. Turpentine and pine oil may be recovered by dry distillation of oleoresin or by destructive distillation of pine wood. Solvent extraction of shredded stumps and roots has become more common with the availability of inexpensive naphtha. Rosin remains in the still after turpentine and water have boiled off.
The naval stores industry produces and markets products derived from the oleoresin of pine trees, including rosin, tall oil, pine oil, and turpentine. It does this by collecting and processing organic forest products refined from slash pine and longleaf pine trees (genus Pinus). The naval stores industry was associated with the maintenance of the wooden ships and sailing tackle of pre-20th century navies, which were caulked and waterproofed using the pitch (a product made with tar) of the pine tree.
Pine rosin processes
The basic raw material, pine resin, once collected, is converted into two major products — rosin and turpentine. For many years rosin and turpentine were used unprocessed in common household products such as soap, paper, paint, and varnish. Today most rosin is altered to be used in a wide range of products that includes paper sizing, surface coatings, adhesives, printing inks, and rubber compounds. Turpentine, like rosin, has become a versatile material exploited to develop uses in fragrances, flavors, vitamins, household cleaning products, medicines, and polyterpene resin.

Needle cast is a group of fungal diseases of conifers, sharing the symptom that the infected trees cast their needle leaves. Since most conifers are evergreens, replacing their leaves only slowly, loss of leaves is more serious than in broad-leaved trees, reducing growth.
Diseases
Several fungal diseases of conifers cause needle cast. Among these are diseases caused by ascomycete fungi such as Swiss needle cast, Cyclaneusma needle cast, and diseases caused by oomycete fungi, such as Red needle cast. Since most conifers are evergreens, replacing their leaves only slowly, loss of leaves is more serious than in broad-leaved trees, reducing growth, especially of stands of young trees.
Diagnosis requires examination of the fungal spores, as the symptoms are similar to those caused by abiotic factors such as poor nutrition.
Caused by ascomycetes
Swiss needle cast is caused by the ascomycete Nothophaeocryptopus gaeumannii (order Pleosporales), native to western North America. Damage is minimal in the native area, but is severe when the disease occurs in Europe, where infected needles die and fall within 1 to 3 years.
Cyclaneusma needle cast is caused by an ascomycete in the family Marthamycetaceae; it infects pine trees in North America and New Zealand, especially in cold and wet conditions. It can cause serious losses to growers of Christmas trees if trees are infected in the autumn.
Rhizosphaera needle cast is caused by ascomycetes in the order Sphaeropsidales. Several species of Rhizosphaera can infect trees, with R. kalkhoffii the most common. The disease causes severe defoliation, for instance in spruces. It can infect balsam fir, Douglas fir, western hemlock, and several species of spruces and pines. The unsightliness renders infected blue spruce unsuitable for ornamental uses.
Caused by oomycetes
Red needle cast of conifers including Douglas fir in western North America is caused by an oomycete fungus, Phytophthora pluvialis. Other trees that can be infected include some species of pine, and the western hemlock. The disease has been reported in England and New Zealand.

Negro is the name of an artist's drawing medium, consisting of black pencil lead often encased in a wooden or paper tool. Its history and uses are common knowledge among illustrators and historians interested in illustrative art. The word "Negro", translates to "black" in Spanish and Italian, and is a term commonly used to describe artists' media and pigments that are black or dark in color.
History
Negro lead was originally composed of a mixture of wax and charcoal and was often used in combination with heavily textured coquille paper. The intention was to create sturdy pencil line art which was dark enough to be reproduced with early photographic technology. It was used as a replacement for lithographic printmaking, just as pen and ink line art essentially took the place of intaglio in late 19th-century illustration.
While the name is used in the artistic sense, referring to the literal shade of the pencil, stylized depictions of Black Africans have been used in marketing campaigns and product packaging.
One of the original producers of negro pencils was the Koh-i-Noor company; however, those manufactured by the company today are composed of lead that is slightly less dark and waxy than the originals. Cretacolor produces what they call Nero pencils, which are similar in composition. Prismacolor also manufactures a lead-based black pencil that is very close in composition.

Extractive metallurgy of nickel is the set of operations that allow the manufacture of nickel metal from ore. It also concerns the recycling of metallurgical waste containing nickel (40% of nickel consumed in 2005 was recycled).
Nickel is extracted from two types of ores: laterites and sulfides. Although 70% of nickel reserves are lateritic ores, these only account for 40% of global production. Lateritic ores are primarily used for the production of ferronickel, while sulfide ores are generally used for the production of very pure nickel.
Whether lateritic or sulfide, nickel ores are mined when their nickel content exceeds 1.3%. This low content explains the complexity and diversity of processes, determined by the nature of the ore's gangue, as well as the desired quality of nickel at the end of extraction.
History
Jules Garnier traveled through New Caledonia from 1863 to 1866 and discovered an ore containing a maximum of 6 to 7% nickel, which was named garnierite in his honor. Nickel production began there in 1875. At that time, there was a heated debate between those who advocated a hydrometallurgical treatment and Garnier, who opted for a pyrometallurgical process.
During the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1883, nickel was discovered in the Sudbury Basin in Ontario. This discovery led to significant European immigration. The abundance of nickel in the region earned it the nickname "Nickel Capital."
Developed in Sudbury (Canada) in 1905, the production of nickel from sulfide ores, which are also rich in copper and cobalt, quickly surpassed production from laterites.
In 1921, nickel veins were discovered in Finland in the Petsamo region. Nickel exploitation began in 1935 by the Canadian company Inco.
In 1935, Stalin decided to create the city of Norilsk in Siberia for the exploitation of a nickel deposit by the company Norilsk Nickel and a forced labor camp known as the Norillag.
After the Winter War between Russia and Finland, in 1940, a German-Soviet consortium, including IG Farben and Krupp, shared the exploitation of nickel in the Petsamo region. After World War II, the Russian nickel industry was developed by the Soviet company Norilsk Nickel.
Primary ores
Laterites
Laterites are generally located in tropical regions. They are notably exploited in New Caledonia, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Cuba. This ore is mined when its nickel content exceeds 1.3%, and its cobalt content exceeds 0.1%.
Laterites are complex minerals resulting from the disintegration of oceanic peridotite floors when they emerge due to tectonic movements (as in New Caledonia). They are therefore surface deposits. The weathering of peridotite (a mixture of olivine and pyroxene) causes vertical segregation, from the soil surface to the bedrock:
limonite, rich in hydrated iron (goethite) and low in magnesia. It forms the iron cap of the deposit;
smectites, such as nontronite, are found in some deposits (Western Australia), beneath the limonite;
saprolites, such as garnierite. Unlike limonite, they are rich in magnesia and poorer in iron.
The configuration of the strata changes according to climate and soil age. Each stratum measures 2 to 5 meters thick. Rain and vegetation leach the surface limonite layer, removing magnesia and silica from the original peridotite rock, enriching it with iron, nickel, and cobalt. Dissolved nickel also tends to descend through percolation, enriching the deep saprolite layer. This leaching occurs over a period of 1 to 10 million years, and its progress differs depending on the deposit.
Sulfide ores
Unlike laterites, the formation of sulfide ores is independent of climate. They are found in Canada and northern Siberia. Sulfide ore deposits originate from:
magma upwelling through the Earth's crust;
metal concentration due to the presence of geothermal waters.
The most common mineral found in nickel sulfide deposits is pentlandite. The sulfur comes from the parent rock, and the molar ratio of nickel to iron ranges from 0.34 to 2.45, with an average of 1.15. This mineral is frequently accompanied by pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite, as well as more or less precious metals such as cobalt, silver, and platinum group metals. Deposits used for nickel extraction contain 1 to 3% nickel.
Except for pyrrhotite, where nickel substitutes for iron in varying proportions, sulfide nickel ore deposits contain very few minerals of nickel sulfide. Therefore, like lateritic deposits, the nature of their gangue has a significant influence on extraction processes.
Extraction
Mining extraction
Lateritic deposits
It is important to distinguish between surface ores (limonite and smectite) and deep ores (saprolite) in the deposit. Indeed, the high iron content in limonite and smectite penalizes pyrometallurgical processes, whereas when dissolved in hot sulfuric acid, iron precipitates as hematite or jarosite. Moreover, the sulfuric acid consumption due to magnesia is economically acceptable, as it does not exceed 3% of the ore weight to be treated.
Conversely, the magnesia content of saprolite (20%) makes its hydrometallurgical treatment too costly due to sulfuric acid consumption. But the low iron content (15%) allows obtaining a rich ferronickel containing 20 to 30% nickel. Some cobalt is present in this ferroalloy, but in too small a quantity to influence steel customers.
Ore concentration by hydrometallurgy
Laterites, which typically contain between 1.3 and 2.5% nickel, are crushed, screened, and, if the process is wet, hydrocycloned to remove as much waste as possible. This typically doubles the nickel content. The finer the grinding (down to 75 μm), the more effective the enrichment. All laterite enrichment methods are based on the principle that rich minerals are softer than minerals not yet transformed into laterites (olivine) or transformed into hard and nickel-poor products (quartz). A condition is therefore to carry out "gentle" grinding that does not affect the hardest minerals.
Limonite is leached in a sulfuric acid solution at 250 °C and 40 bar.
Sulfide ores are finely ground (particle size less than 50 μm), typically in two stages: a gyratory crusher followed by a ball mill working on a 50% wet product. A flotation stage allows separating:
the sterile gangue (less than 0.3% nickel, rich in pyrrhotite)
the nickel concentrate (10 to 20% nickel, mainly pentlandite)
the copper concentrate.
Flotation is froth flotation with air, which consists of isolating naturally or artificially hydrophilic components (often pyrrhotite and gangue) from hydrophobic components (often pentlandite). Hydrophobic components attach to bubbles and rise in the bath, while hydrophilic ones remain in the aqueous solution. The copper and nickel concentrates are then treated by pyrometallurgy.
Fusion and pyrometallurgical refining
Saprolite
Saprolite, which contains little iron, is the only laterite suitable for fusion in an electric arc furnace. It can be used to make either ferronickel or a matte of nickel, which will be refined by pyrometallurgy.
The production of ferronickel exploits two chemical characteristics of iron and nickel:
iron and nickel oxides are easily reduced by carbon at 800 °C through a direct reduction reaction. Alumina and magnesia are not reducible at these temperatures, while chromium(III) oxide (Cr2O3) and silica are to a small extent, which explains the presence of a few percent chromium and silicon in ferronickel;
iron(II) oxide (or wüstite), which is the stable iron oxide at 800 °C, has a reducibility close to that of nickel(II) oxide: it is therefore not possible to reduce one without the other. Since iron does not add value to ferronickel, ores are selected to minimize its presence.
The concentrated saprolite ore intended for ferronickel production, which contains 35% water, is first dried in a first rotary drum (4 m in diameter and 30 m long), then calcined and pre-reduced in a large direct reduction drum (5 m in diameter and 100 m, or even 185 m, long) From the direct reduction drum emerges a powder, or dry calcine, containing 1.5 to 3% nickel at 900 °C, partially reduced This calcine can be obtained using other furnaces, but at the beginning of the 21st century, "static furnace processes have been tried, with limited success. Most ferronickel producers invest in rotary furnaces. In 2011, only one producer installs static shaft furnaces".
The calcine is then melted in electric furnaces 15 to 20 m in diameter, producing 100 to 200 tonnes of ferronickel per day. This melting stage allows the separation, by decantation, of oxides (which form slag) from molten iron and nickel. Melting, which occurs at 1500 °C, is very energy-intensive. Furthermore, the reduction of iron and nickel oxides by carbon, provided by the graphite electrodes or contained in the powder, is highly endothermic: furnaces typically consume 500 kWh per tonne of charged powder. However, in the molten metal, no reduction reaction affects the other oxides, which form the slag. The metal separates easily because, in addition to its much lower density, it is an ionic compound, not miscible with the molten metal. At this stage, raw or unrefined ferronickel is recovered from the electric furnace.
Since the electric furnace reduces iron and nickel, it cannot remove sulfur and phosphorus, undesirable elements present in ferronickel at 0.4% and 0.06%, respectively. As in steel production, these elements are typically removed by oxidation. Moreover, the elimination of their oxides requires a basic medium, rich in lime and poor in silica, to form CaS and (CaO)4P2O5, which then float in lime-rich slag. Desulfurization and dephosphorization are therefore carried out in a separate ladle metallurgy workshop, where much less powerful electric ladle furnaces ensure the stirring of the molten metal.
It is also possible to add sulfur in the direct reduction rotary kiln. This results in a sulfide matte (63% iron, 28% nickel, 10% sulfur) at the exit of the electric furnace, which is then refined in a Peirce-Smith converter. Blowing, limited to the first stage of the Manhès-David process, removes all iron from the matte. The "white matte" that comes out (78% nickel and 20% sulfur) is solidified, crushed, and roasted twice (an oxidizing roast to remove sulfur, then a reducing roast to remove oxygen introduced by the first roast) to produce pure nickel. It is also possible to purify this white matte by electrolysis, or to make nickel salts through hydrometallurgical processes. Resulfurization of nickel concerns approximately 10% of lateritic ore treatment, or less than 4% of nickel production from ores.
Limonite and smectite
Limonite and smectite are too rich in iron to be economically treated by pyrometallurgical processes. However, their low magnesia content facilitates their treatment by hydrometallurgy. Indeed, it is important to minimize sulfuric acid consumption, which combines with magnesia, a base.
The concentrated ores from limonite and smectite are therefore leached with sulfuric acid. The reaction takes place in an autoclave 4.5 m in diameter and 30 m long, capable of treating 2,000 tonnes of concentrates per day. This process, called "HPAL process" for High-pressure Acid-Leaching process, is conducted at 250 °C and 40 bar. It removes more than 95% of nickel and cobalt and consists of:
precipitating iron, which arrived as goethite, by transforming it into hematite. This is discharged with the mud, containing 51% iron by weight;
transforming nickel(II) hydroxide Ni(OH)2 into soluble nickel(II) sulfate NiSO4. This solution contains 95% of the nickel and cobalt from the concentrated ore.
The acidic liquid rich in nickel (6 g/L nickel, 0.5 g/L cobalt, 30 to 50 g/L H2SO4), is then purified of impurities (aluminium, chromium, copper, etc.) by neutralization. Finally, a new treatment with sulfuric acid at lower temperature and pressure allows the precipitation of nickel sulfate NiSO4 as a compound based on nickel sulfide NiS (composition: 55% nickel, 5% cobalt, 40% sulfur).
Sulfide ores
The nickel concentrates (10 to 20% nickel, mainly pentlandite) produced by froth flotation of sulfide ores are treated by pyrometallurgy. Indeed, sulfide ores like pentlandite generally contain appreciable amounts of precious metals (gold, silver, platinum, etc.), which are difficult to recover by hydrometallurgical processes. The concentrates can be melted in two ways: flash smelting or the electric arc furnace. In both cases, a slag, which is discarded, and a nickel matte, both at 1450 °C, are obtained.
In 2009, a quarter of nickel sulfides are melted in an electric furnace. Before melting in the electric furnace, the concentrated ore is roasted in a fluidized bed reactor (typical characteristics: 5 m in diameter, 6 m high, production of 50 t/h) at a temperature between 600 and 760 °C. This roasting is oxidizing: part of the sulfur leaves as gaseous SO2, further enriching the concentrate in nickel.
The hot and dry calcine (about 300 °C) is then fed into the electric furnace, generally rectangular and heated by 6 electrodes. The fusibility of the slag is improved by adding siliceous flux. Like in ferronickel production, the fusion-reduction in the furnace consumes about 500 kWh per tonne of charged calcine. Similarly, carbon is added to the bath to produce CO, maintaining a reducing environment for NiO. However, unlike ferronickel production, it is sulfur, present as iron(II) sulfide FeS, that performs most of the reduction of nickel oxide NiO, which becomes nickel sulfide NiS. The matte from the electric furnace contains about 30% nickel.
The alternative process is flash smelting, which treats three-quarters of nickel sulfides It performs roasting and smelting operations in the same reactor. Indeed:
flash smelting is oxidizing (while electric furnace smelting is reducing), allowing part of the sulfur to be evacuated as gaseous SO2, and part of the iron as FeO, an oxide that goes with the slag;
prior roasting before electric furnace smelting, which is an oxidation operation of the concentrated ore, is not necessary. Moreover, since this roasting is exothermic, it aids smelting.
A flash smelting furnace typically measures 25 m long and 8 m wide. Such a furnace continuously produces between 1,000 and 2,000 tonnes of molten matte per day, containing about 40% nickel.
The matte, which collects 98% of the nickel from the calcine or concentrate, separates easily from the slag, although the slag from flash smelting often contains an appreciable amount of oxidized nickel, sometimes leading to its recovery in a dedicated electric furnace. The matte is then refined in a Peirce-Smith converter, following the Manhès-David process (a process derived from the Bessemer process), which is stopped when all iron is oxidized and has passed into the slag. The refined matte (sometimes called white matte or converter matte) then contains 40 to 70% nickel, sulfur, and metals not oxidized by the converter (copper, gold, silver, and platinum group metals).
The slag from the converter is almost systematically sent to an electric furnace that keeps it molten to settle all the metal droplets it contains. Indeed, the significant agitation of the bath in the converter does not allow perfect separation between slag and matte.
Nearly half of the nickel mattes from sulfide ores are slowly cooled (three days at 500 °C then one day at 200 °C). This allows the average grain size to increase from 10 to 100 μm. Then, grinding the metal to this particle size prepares the separation of Cu2S, Ni3S2, and Ni-Cu. A first magnetic separation removes the Ni-Cu metallic alloy (65% nickel, 17% copper, and precious metals) from the sulfides. Then, these sulfides are treated by leaching in a basic solution (pH 12), with Cu2S floating while Ni3S2 sinks to the bottom.
Final refining
Four main final refining methods can be distinguished:
oxidizing then reducing roasting;
hydrometallurgical treatment;
carbonylation of nickel, or Mond process;
electrolysis.
Roasting of the matte
Roasting concerns the converter matte (or "white matte") produced by sulfur injection in the treatment of saprolites. This process belongs to a rather marginal metallurgical route. The converter matte (78% nickel and 20% sulfur) is solidified, crushed, and roasted twice: an oxidizing roast to remove sulfur, then a reducing roast to remove oxygen introduced by the first roast. The result is pure nickel.
Hydrometallurgy of nickel sulfides
A final hydrometallurgical step can treat both the matte from the Peirce-Smith converter and the sulfides from the treatment of iron-rich laterites (limonite and smectite). The processes are numerous and complex, both due to patents and the diversity of ores. Indeed, because of the richness in nickel of the products, the quantities to be treated are limited: complexity does not significantly affect profitability. But it is essential to recover all metals without waste. Hydrometallurgical refining consists successively of:
leaching, which can be done using three different chemistries: either chlorine gas in a chlorinated solution (usually followed by electrolysis), or oxygen in ammonia (the Sherritt process, consisting of precipitating a nickel methenamine sulfate (2Ni(NH3)6SO4)), or oxygen in sulfuric acid;
purifying the solution to remove precipitates of cobalt and copper. This is done by crystallization or by liquid-liquid extraction;
reduction by hydrogen to give a sintered nickel powder in briquettes, or electrolysis.
Nickel sulfides from laterite treatment have a composition of 55% nickel, 5% cobalt, and 35% sulfur. They are easier to treat than those from sulfide ores, which contain copper.
Carbonylation
The carbonylation of nickel, or Mond process, is a refining method capable of efficiently extracting nickel from metal alloys low in iron. Among metals, nickel has the characteristic of forming nickel tetracarbonyl Ni(CO)4 gas at 50 °C in the presence of carbon monoxide, which, when heated to 220–250 °C, decomposes back into pure metallic nickel and carbon monoxide. The decomposition of nickel tetracarbonyl is typically done by passing the gas through a bed of nickel pellets heated to 240 °C. Since iron can also form iron pentacarbonyl under the process conditions, the iron content in the metal to be refined is minimized, which is why the Mond process is applied to converter mattes freed of iron by the Manhès-David process.
In 2009, this process concerns a little less than 300,000 tonnes per year of nickel out of the 1,500,000 tonnes of primary nickel produced worldwide.
Electrolysis
Nickel can be refined by electrolysis. It accumulates on the cathode, while oxygen escapes at the anode, with the electrolyte being a mixture of nickel sulfide and sulfuric acid. Cathodes are harvested after about 7 days.
In 2009, approximately 200,000 tonnes per year of nickel with a purity of 99.9%, out of the 1,500,000 tonnes of primary nickel produced worldwide, are refined by electrolysis.
Economic aspects
Industrial characteristics
Like all mining industries, it is essential to accurately assess the size of the deposit since the facilities will be useless once it is depleted. In 2004, an extraction project must have a minimum capacity of 40,000 tonnes per year for 20 years.
The investment costs related to the commissioning of a nickel mine depend heavily on the type of exploitation (open-pit mines are significantly less expensive than underground mines). Of course, the richness of the ore allows for a considerable reduction in the investment cost of both the mine and the associated plant. The enrichment level of a lateritic ore should not exceed three. In practice, industries abandon ores requiring an enrichment level greater than two.
At the beginning of the 21st century, some projects allow estimating the construction cost of a plant producing 60,000 tonnes per year of ferronickel from laterite at approximately 4 billion dollars (Koniambo, New Caledonia). This represents an investment of 70,000 dollars per tonne of nickel produced annually. The minimum capacity for a profitable ferronickel plant is estimated at 60,000 tonnes per year. For a plant producing pure nickel, the costs are similar.
In 2010, the tonne of nickel traded as ferronickel is quoted at 26,000 dollars. The cost of transforming ore into ferronickel at the same time is between 4,000 and 6,000 dollars for an efficient plant: capital amortization explains much of the difference between selling price and production cost.
Like many metallurgical processes, energy consumption is a key factor in profitability. The use of coal instead of hydrocarbons, electricity generation from dams are some of the most common methods to reduce energy costs.
Economic importance
For the few countries with nickel deposits, extraction can be a key element of their economy. In the 2010s, nickel mines and metallurgy represent 80% of the value of New Caledonia's exports, although only 45% of the extracted ore is processed locally. At the same time, nickel is the third source of export revenue for Cuba, after tourism and sugar.
Current and future developments
The extraction of nickel from laterite, which began in the early 20th century in New Caledonia, quickly became minor compared to extraction from sulfide ores, which started shortly after in Sudbury. However, given current projects, production from sulfide ores is expected to stagnate, while production from laterites is expected to account for most of the growth.
A current research axis concerns the development of "omnivorous" processes, compatible with both saprolite and smectite, i.e., capable of treating nickel laterite deposits without having to separate these two ores.
Ore enrichment is essential for profitability. But "all lateritic deposits are different. For this reason, all ores must be carefully tested to determine how far they can be enriched". Thus, some companies, such as Le Nickel, strongly defend the interest of enrichment while remaining very discreet about the details of their processes.
It is also worth noting the revival, from 2005, of the production of nickel pig iron, a ferronickel containing 4 to 13% nickel when produced in a blast furnace, and 8 to 15% nickel when produced in an electric furnace. In 2010, this cheap substitute for ferronickel produced in China represents 10% of the nickel extraction market. That year, one-third is from small blast furnaces (the rest from electric furnaces), using laterites from Indonesia and the Philippines. This Chinese innovation is closely studied by industrialists. However, in January 2014, Indonesia's ban on nickel ore exports threatens this sector, which sources half of its supply from that country, pushing some producers to build blast furnaces on the extraction site itself, in Indonesia

A notable aspect of the Nok culture (based in Kaduna State of Nigeria, 280-1 BC) was its advanced iron smelting technology, which had a wide-reaching impact on their tools and weapons. Interestingly, the Nok are among the few known civilizations to transition directly from stone tools to iron tools, without passing through the intermediate Bronze Age or Chalcolithic copper tool stages.
The Nok civilization used iron-smelting furnaces that operated at very high temperatures and showed a sophisticated understanding of pyrotechnology. Radiocarbon dating has placed some of these furnaces as early as 280 BC.
This metallurgical innovation led to the creation of durable iron tools, such as hoes, which were particularly useful in agriculture. However, due to the limited availability of metal, stone tools continued to be used alongside iron ones.

Non-timber forest products (NTFPs) are useful foods, substances, materials and/or commodities obtained from forests other than timber. Harvest ranges from wild collection to farming. They typically include game animals, fur-bearers, nuts, seeds, berries, mushrooms, oils, sap, foliage, pollarding, medicinal plants, peat, mast, fuelwood, fish, insects, spices, and forage. Overlapping concepts include non-wood forest products (NWFPs), wild forest products, minor forest produce, special, minor, alternative and secondary forest products – for further distinctions see the definition section below
Research on NTFPs has focused on their ability to be produced as commodities for rural incomes and markets, as an expression of traditional knowledge or as a livelihood option for rural household needs, as a key component of sustainable forest management and conservation strategies, and for their important role in improving dietary diversity and providing nutritious food, particularly for forest-proximate peoples. All research promotes forest products as valuable commodities and tools that can promote the conservation of forests.
NTFPs are of value to local people and communities, but have been overlooked in the wake of forest management priorities (for example, timber production and animal forage). For example, some 2.4 billion people – in both urban and rural settings – use wood-based energy for cooking.
In recent decades, interest has grown in using NTFPs as alternatives or supplements to forest management practices. In some forest types, under the right political and social conditions, forests can be managed to increase NTFP diversity, and consequently, to increase biodiversity and potentially economic diversity. Black truffle cultivation in the Mediterranean area is highly profitable when well managed.
Definitions
NTFPs include such varied products as mushrooms, huckleberries, ferns, transplants, seed cones, pine nuts, tree nuts, moss, maple syrup, cork, cinnamon, rubber, wild pigs, tree oils and resins, and ginseng. The United Kingdom's Forestry Commission defines NTFPs as "any biological resources found in woodlands except timber", and Forest Harvest, part of the Reforesting Scotland project, defines them as "materials supplied by woodlands - except the conventional harvest of timber". These definitions include wild and managed game, fish, and insects.
Non-wood forest products
Non-wood forest products (NWFPs) are a subset of NTFP; they exclude woodfuel and wood charcoal. Both NWFP and NTFP include wild foods. Worldwide, around 1 billion people depend to some extent on wild foods such as wild meat, edible insects, edible plant products, mushrooms and fish, which often contain high levels of key micronutrients. Several million households world-wide depend on NWFPs for income, and these products may be particularly important for local economies. On a global scale, FAO estimates that NWFPs generated US$88 billion in 2011.
Land conversion, pollution and overharvesting threaten wild species and collectors' lives and livelihoods in many regions of the world. For instance, one in five medicinal and aromatic plant species have been found to be threatened with extinction, yet only 7 percent of MAPs have been assessed for the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (TRAFFIC, 2018). Data and information on NWFPs is incomplete yet essential to monitor their status in the wild, their contribution to food and nutrition security and for traceability across the supply chain.
Other groupings or names for these types of forest products include wild forest products, minor forest produce, special, minor, alternative and secondary forest products. The term non-wood forest products (NWFP) differs from NTFP in that it does not include woodfuel or wood charcoal. The terminology debate on NWFPs has persisted for decades, although steps have been taken to disentangle the different terms and definitions for improved forest statistics.
Uses
The harvest of NTFPs remains widespread throughout the world. People from a wide range of socioeconomic, geographical, and cultural contexts harvest NTFPs for a number of purposes, including household subsistence, maintenance of cultural and familial traditions, spiritual fulfilment, physical and emotional well-being, house heating and cooking, animal feeding, indigenous medicine and healing, scientific learning, and income.
More than 28,000 plant species are currently recorded as being of medicinal use; many of them are found in forest ecosystems. Visits to forest environments can have positive impacts on human physical and mental health and many people have a deep spiritual relationship to forests.
Economic importance
Estimating the contribution of NTFPs to national or regional economies is difficult, broad-based systems for tracking the combined value of the hundreds of products that make up various NTFP industries are lacking. One exception to this is the maple syrup industry, which in 2002 in the US alone yielded 1.4 million US gallons (5,300 m3) worth US$D 38.3 million. In temperate forests such as in the US, wild edible mushrooms such as matsutake, medicinal plants such as ginseng, and floral greens such as salal and sword fern are multimillion-dollar industries. Others with documented trade data include Brazil nuts, bamboo, honey, chestnuts, and gum Arabic, among others.
In tropical forests, for example, NTFPs can be an important source of income that can supplement farming and/or other activities. A value analysis of the Amazon rainforest in Peru found that exploitation of NTFPs could yield higher net revenue per hectare than would timber harvest of the same area, while still conserving vital ecological services.
Impacts on people
Gendered differences
Both men and women are involved in collection and sale of NWFPs – and have different knowledge on different products, although women tend to collect forest foods to supplement the nutrition of their households – empowering them has important spill-over effects on households'/communities' nutrition. For part-time (unpaid) collection of woodfuel for rural uses, women account for almost 80 percent of all labour and a significantly higher proportion than this in Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean.
Research
Research on NTFPs has focused on three perspectives: NTFPs as a commodity with a focus on rural incomes and markets, as an expression of traditional knowledge or as a livelihood option for rural household needs, and finally, as a key component of sustainable forest management and conservation strategies. These perspectives promote forest products as valuable commodities and important tools that can promote the conservation of forests. In some contexts, the gathering and use of NTFPs can be a mechanism for poverty alleviation and local development.
Bioproducts
Ethnobotany
Countermeasures in LULUCF
Ecotourism in the Amazon rainforest
Rural crafts
Waste valorization

Nurse crops are a subtype of nurse plants, facilitating the growth of other species of plants. The term is used primarily in agriculture, but also in forestry. Cover crops are a type of nurse crop.
Agriculture
In agriculture, a nurse crop is an annual crop used to assist in establishment of a perennial crop. The widest use of nurse crops is in the establishment of legumaceous plants such as alfalfa, clover, and trefoil. Occasionally, nurse crops are used for establishment of perennial grasses.
Nurse crops reduce the incidence of weeds, prevent erosion, and prevent excessive sunlight from reaching tender seedlings. Often, the nurse crop can be harvested for grain, straw, hay, or pasture. Oats are the most common nurse crop, though other annual grains are also used. Nurse cropping of tall or dense-canopied plants can protect more vulnerable species through shading or by providing a wind break.
However, if ill-maintained, nurse crops can block sunlight from reaching seedlings.
Trap crops prevent pests from affecting the desired plant.
Forestry
In forestry, 'nurse crop' can be applied to trees or shrubs that help the development of other species of trees. Wind breaking, frost protection, thermal insulation, and shade can all be provided by nurse crops in forests. Aspens especially provide partial shade, allowing understory growth.

An oak is a hardwood tree or shrub in the genus Quercus of the beech family. They have spirally arranged leaves, often with lobed edges, and a nut called an acorn, borne within a cup. The genus is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere, with some 500 species, both deciduous and evergreen. Fossil oaks date back to the Middle Eocene. Molecular phylogeny shows that the genus is divided into Old World and New World clades, but many oak species hybridise freely, making the genus's history difficult to resolve.
Ecologically, oaks are keystone species in habitats from Mediterranean semi-desert to subtropical rainforest. They live in association with many kinds of fungi including truffles. Oaks support more than 950 species of caterpillar, many kinds of gall wasp which form distinctive galls (roundish woody lumps such as the oak apple), and a large number of pests and diseases. Oak leaves and acorns contain enough tannin to be toxic to cattle, but pigs are able to digest them safely. Oak timber is strong and hard, and has found many uses in construction and furniture-making. The bark was traditionally used for tanning leather. Wine barrels are made of oak; these are used for aging alcoholic beverages such as sherry and whisky, giving them a range of flavours, colours, and aromas. The spongy bark of the cork oak is used to make traditional wine bottle corks. Almost a third of oak species are threatened with extinction due to climate change, invasive pests, and habitat loss.
In culture, the oak tree is a symbol of strength and serves as the national tree of many countries. In Indo-European and related religions, the oak is associated with thunder gods. Individual oak trees of cultural significance include the Royal Oak in Britain, the Charter Oak in the United States, and the Guernica Oak in the Basque Country.
Etymology
The generic name Quercus is Latin for "oak", derived from Proto-Indo-European *kwerkwu-, "oak", which is also the origin of the name "fir", another important or sacred tree in Indo-European culture. The word "cork", for the bark of the cork oak, similarly derives from Quercus. The common name "oak" is from Old English ac (seen in placenames such as Acton, from ac + tun, "oak village"), which in turn is from Proto-Germanic *aiks, "oak".
Description
Oaks are hardwood (dicotyledonous) trees, deciduous or evergreen, with spirally arranged leaves, often with lobate margins; some have serrated leaves or entire leaves with smooth margins. Many deciduous species are marcescent, not dropping dead leaves until spring. In spring, a single oak tree produces both male and female flowers. The staminate (male) flowers are arranged in catkins, while the small pistillate (female) flowers produce an acorn (a kind of nut) contained in a cupule. Each acorn usually contains one seed and takes 6–18 months to mature, depending on the species. The acorns and leaves contain tannic acid, which helps to guard against fungi and insects. There are some 500 extant species of oaks.
Trees in the genus are usually large and slow-growing; Q. alba can reach an age of 600 years, a diameter of 13 feet (4.0 m) and a height of 145 feet (44 m). The Granit oak in Bulgaria, a Q. robur specimen, has an estimated age of 1,637 years, making it the oldest oak in Europe. The Wi'aaSal tree, a live oak in the reservation of the Pechanga Band of Indians, California, is at least 1,000 years old, and might be as much as 2,000 years old, which would make it the oldest oak in the US. Among the smallest oaks is Q. acuta, the Japanese evergreen oak. It forms a bush or small tree to a height of some 30 feet (9.1 m).
Evolution
Fossil history
Potential records of Quercus have been reported from Late Cretaceous deposits in North America and East Asia. These are not considered definitive, as macrofossils older than the Paleogene, and possibly from before the Eocene are mostly poorly preserved without critical features for certain identification. Amongst the oldest unequivocal records of Quercus are pollen from Austria, dating to the Paleocene-Eocene boundary, around 55 million years ago. The oldest records of Quercus in North America are from Oregon, dating to the Middle Eocene, around 44 million years ago, with the oldest records in Asia from the Middle Eocene of Japan; both forms have affinities to the Cyclobalanopsis group.
External phylogeny
Quercus forms part, or rather two parts, of the Quercoideae subfamily of the Fagaceae, the beech family. Modern molecular phylogenetics suggests the following relationships:
Internal phylogeny
Molecular techniques for phylogenetic analysis show that the genus Quercus consisted of Old World and New World clades. The entire genome of Quercus robur (the pedunculate oak) has been sequenced, revealing an array of mutations that may underlie the evolution of longevity and disease resistance in oaks. In addition, hundreds of oak species have been compared (at RAD-seq loci), allowing a detailed phylogeny to be constructed. However, the high signal of introgressive hybridization (the transfer of genetic material by repeated backcrossing with hybrid offspring) in the genus has made it difficult to resolve an unambiguous, unitary history of oaks. The phylogeny from Hipp et al. 2019 is:
Taxonomy
Taxonomic history
The genus Quercus was circumscribed by Carl Linnaeus in the first edition of his 1753 Species Plantarum. He described 15 species within the new genus, providing type specimens for 10 of these, and giving names but no types for Q. cerris, Q. coccifera, Q. ilex, Q. smilax, and Q. suber. He chose Q. robur, the pedunculate oak, as the type species for the genus.
A 2017 classification of Quercus, based on multiple molecular phylogenetic studies, divided the genus into two subgenera and eight sections:
Subgenus Quercus – the New World clade (or high-latitude clade), mostly native to North America
Section Lobatae Loudon – North American red oaks
Section Protobalanus (Trelease) O.Schwarz – North American intermediate oaks
Section Ponticae Stef. – with a disjunct distribution between western Eurasia and western North America
Section Virentes Loudon – American southern live oaks
Section Quercus – white oaks from North America and Eurasia
Subgenus Cerris Oerst. – the Old World clade (or mid-latitude clade), exclusively native to Eurasia
Section Cyclobalanopsis Oerst. – cycle-cup oaks of East Asia
Section Cerris Dumort. – cerris oaks of subtropical and temperate Eurasia and North Africa
Section Ilex Loudon – ilex oaks of tropical and subtropical Eurasia and North Africa
The subgenus division supports the evolutionary diversification of oaks among two distinct clades: the Old World clade (subgenus Cerris), including oaks that diversified in Eurasia; and the New World clade (subgenus Quercus), oaks that diversified mainly in the Americas.
Subgenus Quercus
Sect. Lobatae (synonym Erythrobalanus), the red oaks of North America, Central America and northern South America. Styles are long; the acorns mature in 18 months and taste very bitter. The inside of the acorn shell appears woolly. The actual nut is encased in a thin, clinging, papery skin. The leaves typically have sharp lobe tips, with spiny bristles at the lobe.
Sect. Protobalanus, the canyon live oak and its relatives, in the southwestern United States and northwest Mexico. Styles are short; the acorns mature in 18 months and taste very bitter. The inside of the acorn shell appears woolly. The leaves typically have sharp lobe tips, with bristles at the lobe tip.
Sect. Ponticae, a disjunct including just two species. Styles are short, and the acorns mature in 12 months. The leaves have large stipules, high secondary veins, and are highly toothed.
Sect. Virentes, the southern live oaks of the Americas. Styles are short, and the acorns mature in 12 months. The leaves are evergreen or subevergreen.
Sect. Quercus (synonyms Lepidobalanus and Leucobalanus), the white oaks of Europe, Asia and North America. Trees or shrubs that produce nuts, specifically acorns, as fruits. Acorns mature in one year for annual trees and two years for biannual trees. Acorn is encapsulated by a spiny cupule as characterized by the family Fagaceae. Flowers in the Quercus genera produce one flower per node, with three or six styles, as well as three or six ovaries, respectively. The leaves mostly lack a bristle on their lobe tips, which are usually rounded. The type species is Quercus robur.
Subgenus Cerris
The type species is Quercus cerris.
Sect. Cyclobalanopsis, the ring-cupped oaks of eastern and southeastern Asia. These are evergreen trees growing 10–40 metres (33–131 feet) tall. They are distinct from subgenus Quercus in that they have acorns with distinctive cups bearing concrescent rings of scales; they commonly also have densely clustered acorns, though this does not apply to all of the species. Species of Cyclobalanopsis are common in the evergreen subtropical laurel forests, which extend from southern Japan, southern Korea, and Taiwan across southern China and northern Indochina to the eastern Himalayas, in association with trees of the genus Castanopsis and the laurel family (Lauraceae).
Sect. Cerris, the Turkey oak and its relatives of Europe and Asia. Styles are long; acorns mature in 18 months and taste very bitter. The inside of the acorn's shell is hairless. Its leaves typically have sharp lobe tips, with bristles at the lobe tip.
Sect. Ilex, the Ilex oak and its relatives of Eurasia and northern Africa. Styles are medium-long; acorns mature in 12–24 months, appearing hairy on the inside. The leaves are evergreen, with bristle-like extensions on the teeth.
Distribution
The genus Quercus is native to the Northern Hemisphere and includes deciduous and evergreen species extending from cool temperate to tropical latitudes in the Americas, Asia, Europe, and North Africa. North America has the largest number of oak species, with approximately 160 species in Mexico, of which 109 are endemic, and about 90 in the United States. The second greatest area of oak diversity is China, with approximately 100 species.
In the Americas, Quercus is widespread from Vancouver and Nova Scotia in the south of Canada, south to Mexico and across the whole of the eastern United States. It is present in a small area of the west of Cuba; in Mesoamerica it occurs mainly above 1,000 metres (3,300 ft). The genus crossed the isthmus of Panama when the northern and southern continents came together and is present as one species, Q. humboldtii, above 1,000 metres in Colombia. The oaks of North America are of many sections (Protobalanus, Lobatae, Ponticae, Quercus, and Virentes) along with related genera such as Notholithocarpus.
In the Old World, oaks of section Quercus extend across the whole of Europe including European Russia apart from the far north, and north Africa (north of the Sahara) from Morocco to Libya. In Mediterranean Europe, they are joined by oaks of the sections Cerris and Ilex, which extend across Turkey, the Middle East, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan, while section Ponticae is endemic to the western Caucasus in Turkey and Georgia. Oaks of section Cyclobalanopsis extend in a narrow belt along the Himalayas to cover mainland and island Southeast Asia as far as Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and Palawan. Finally, oaks of multiple sections (Cyclobalanopsis, Ilex, Cerris, Quercus and related genera like Lithocarpus and Castanopsis) extend across east Asia including China, Korea, and Japan.
Ecology
Oaks are keystone species in a wide range of habitats from Mediterranean semi-desert to subtropical rainforest. They are important components of hardwood forests; some species grow in associations with members of the Ericaceae in oak–heath forests. Several kinds of truffles, including two well-known varieties – black Périgord truffle and the white Piedmont truffle – have symbiotic relationships with oak trees. Similarly, many other fungi, such as Ramaria flavosaponaria, associate with oaks.
Oaks support more than 950 species of caterpillars, an important food source for many birds. Mature oak trees shed widely varying numbers of acorns (known collectively as mast) annually, with large quantities in mast years. This may be a predator satiation strategy, increasing the chance that some acorns will survive to germination.
Animals including squirrels and jays – Eurasian jays in the Old World, blue jays in North America – feed on acorns, and are important agents of seed dispersal as they carry the acorns away and bury many of them as food stores. However, some species of squirrel selectively excise the embryos from the acorns that they store, meaning that the food store lasts longer and that the acorns will never germinate.
Hybridisation
Interspecific hybridization is quite common among oaks, but usually between species within the same section only, and most common in the white oak group. White oaks cannot discriminate against pollination by other species in the same section. Because they are wind pollinated and have weak internal barriers to hybridization, hybridization produces functional seeds and fertile hybrid offspring. Ecological stresses, especially near habitat margins, can also cause a breakdown of mate recognition as well as a reduction of male function (pollen quantity and quality) in one parent species.
Frequent hybridization among oaks has consequences for oak populations around the world; most notably, hybridization has produced large populations of hybrids with much introgression and the evolution of new species. Introgression has caused different species in the same populations to share up to 50% of their genetic information. As a result, genetic data often does not differentiate between clearly morphologically distinct species, but instead differentiates populations. The maintenance of particular loci for adaptation to ecological niches may explain the retention of species identity despite significant gene flow.
The Fagaceae, or beech family, to which the oaks belong, is a slowly-evolving clade compared to other angiosperms, and the patterns of hybridization and introgression in Quercus pose a significant challenge to the concept of a species as a group of "actually or potentially interbreeding populations which are reproductively isolated from other such groups." By this definition, many species of Quercus would be lumped together according to their geographic and ecological habitat, despite clear distinctions in morphology and genetic data.
Diseases and pests
Oaks are affected by a large number of pests and diseases. For instance, Q. robur and Q. petraea in Britain host 423 insect species. This diversity includes 106 macro-moths, 83 micro-moths, 67 beetles, 53 cynipoidean wasps, 38 heteropteran bugs, 21 auchenorrhynchan bugs, 17 sawflies, and 15 aphids. The insect numbers are seasonal: in spring, chewing insects such as caterpillars become numerous, followed by insects with sucking mouthparts such as aphids, then by leaf miners, and finally by gall wasps such as Neuroterus. Several powdery mildews affect oak species. In Europe, the species Erysiphe alphitoides is the most common. It reduces the ability of leaves to photosynthesize, and infected leaves are shed early.
Another significant threat, the oak processionary moth (Thaumetopoea processionea), has emerged in the UK since 2006. The caterpillars of this species defoliate the trees and are hazardous to human health; their bodies are covered with poisonous hairs which can cause rashes and respiratory problems. A little-understood disease of mature oaks, acute oak decline, has affected the UK since 2009.
In California, goldspotted oak borer (Agrilus auroguttatus) has destroyed many oak trees, while sudden oak death, caused by the oomycete pathogen Phytophthora ramorum, has devastated oaks in California and Oregon, and is present in Europe. Japanese oak wilt, caused by the fungus Raffaelea quercivora, has rapidly killed trees across Japan.
Gall communities
Many galls are found on oak leaves, buds, flowers, and roots. Examples are oak artichoke gall, oak marble gall, oak apple gall, knopper gall, and spangle gall. These galls are the handiwork of tiny wasps from the Cynipidae. In a complex ecological relationship, these gall wasps become hosts to parasitoid wasps—primarily from the order Chalcidoidea—which lay their larvae inside the gall wasps, ultimately leading to the hosts' demise. Additionally, inquilines live commensally within the galls without harming the gall wasps.
Conservation
An estimated 31% of the world's oak species are threatened with extinction, while 41% of oak species are considered to be of conservation concern. The countries with the highest numbers of threatened oak species (as of 2020) are China with 36 species, Mexico with 32 species, Vietnam with 20 species, and the US with 16 species. Leading causes are climate change and invasive pests in the US, and deforestation and urbanization in Asia.
In the Himalayan region of India, oak forests are being invaded by pine trees due to global warming. The associated pine forest species may cross frontiers and integrate into the oak forests.
Over the past 200 years, large areas of oak forest in the highlands of Mexico, Central America, and the northern Andes have been cleared for coffee plantations and cattle ranching. There is a continuing threat to these forests from exploitation for timber, fuelwood, and charcoal. In the US, entire oak ecosystems have declined due to a combination of factors thought to include fire suppression, increased consumption of acorns by growing mammal populations, herbivory of seedlings, and introduced pests. However, disturbance-tolerant oaks may have benefited from grazers like bison, and suffered when the bison were removed following European colonization.
Toxicity
The leaves and acorns of oaks are poisonous to livestock, including cattle and horses, if eaten in large amounts, due to the toxin tannic acid, which causes kidney damage and gastroenteritis. An exception is the domestic pig, which, under the right conditions, may be fed entirely on acorns, and has traditionally been pastured in oak woodlands (such as the Spanish dehesa and the English system of pannage). Humans can eat acorns after leaching out the tannins in water.
Uses
Timber
Oak timber is a strong and hard wood with many uses, such as for furniture, floors, building frames, and veneers. The wood of Quercus cerris (the Turkey oak) has better mechanical properties than those of the white oaks Q. petraea and Q. robur; the heartwood and sapwood have similar mechanical properties. Of the North American red oaks, the northern red oak, Quercus rubra, is highly prized for lumber. The wood is resistant to insect and fungal attack. Wood from Q. robur and Q. petraea was used in Europe for shipbuilding, especially of naval men of war, until the 19th century.
Other traditional products
Oak bark, with its high tannin content, was traditionally used in the Old World for tanning leather. Oak galls were used for centuries as a main ingredient in iron gall ink for manuscripts, harvested at a specific time of year. In Korea, sawtooth oak bark is used to make shingles for traditional roof construction. The dried bark of the white oak was used in traditional medical preparations; its tannic acid content made it astringent and antiseptic. Acorns have been ground to make a flour, and roasted for acorn coffee.
Culinary
Barrels for aging wines, sherry, and spirits such as brandy and Scotch whisky are made from oak, with single barrel malt whiskies fetching a premium. The use of oak in wine adds a range of flavours. Oak barrels, which may be charred before use, contribute to their contents' colour, taste, and aroma, imparting a desirable oaky vanillin flavour. A dilemma for wine producers is to choose between French and American oakwoods. French oaks (Quercus robur, Q. petraea) give greater refinement and are chosen for the best, most expensive wines. American oak contributes greater texture and resistance to ageing, but produces a more powerful bouquet.
Oak wood chips are used for smoking foods such as fish, meat, and cheese. In Japan, Children's Day is celebrated with Kashiwa-mochi rice cakes, filled with a sweet red bean paste, and wrapped in a kashiwa oak leaf.
The bark of the cork oak is used to produce cork stoppers for wine bottles. This species grows around the Mediterranean Sea; Portugal, Spain, Algeria, and Morocco produce most of the world's supply.
Acorns of various oak species have been used as food for millennia, in Asia, Europe, the Middle East, North Africa, and among the native peoples of North America. In North Africa, acorns have been pressed to make acorn oil: the oil content can be as high as 30%. Oaks have also been used as fodder, both leaves and acorns being fed to livestock such as pigs. Given their high tannin content, acorns have often been leached to remove tannins before use as fodder.
Culture
Symbols
The oak is a widely used symbol of strength and endurance. It is the national tree of many countries, including the US, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus (golden oak), Estonia, France, Germany, Moldova, Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Serbia, and Wales. Ireland's fifth-largest city, Derry, is named for the tree, from Irish: Doire, meaning 'oak'. Oak branches are displayed on some German coins, both of the former Deutsche Mark and the euro.
Oak leaves symbolize rank in armed forces including those of the United States. Arrangements of oak leaves, acorns, and sprigs indicate different branches of the United States Navy staff corps officers. The oak tree is used as a symbol by several political parties and organisations. It is the symbol of the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom, and formerly of the Progressive Democrats in Ireland.
Religion
The prehistoric Indo-European tribes worshipped the oak and connected it with a thunder god, and this tradition descended to many classical cultures. In Greek mythology, the oak is the tree sacred to Zeus, king of the gods. In Zeus's oracle in Dodona, Epirus, the sacred oak was the centerpiece of the precinct, and the priests would divine the pronouncements of the god by interpreting the rustling of the oak's leaves. Mortals who destroyed such trees were said to be punished by the gods since the ancient Greeks believed beings called hamadryads inhabited them. In Norse and Baltic mythology, the oak was sacred to the thunder gods Thor and Perkūnas respectively. In Celtic polytheism, the name druid, Celtic priest, is connected to Proto-Indo-European *deru, meaning oak or tree. Veneration of the oak survives in Serbian Orthodox Church tradition. Christmas celebrations include the badnjak, a branch taken from a young and straight oak ceremonially felled early on Christmas Eve morning, similar to a yule log.
History
Category: Individual oak trees
Several oak trees hold cultural importance; such as the Royal Oak in Britain, the Charter Oak in the United States, and the Guernica oak in the Basque Country. "The Proscribed Royalist, 1651", a famous painting by John Everett Millais, depicts a Royalist hiding in an oak tree while fleeing from Cromwell's forces.
In the Roman Republic, a crown of oak leaves was given to those who had saved the life of a citizen in battle; it was called the "Civic Crown". In his 17th century poem The Garden, Andrew Marvell critiqued the desire to be awarded such a leafy crown: "How vainly men themselves amaze / To win the palm, the oak, or bays; And their uncessant labors see / Crowned from some single herb or tree, ..."

Ochre ( OH-kər; from Ancient Greek ὤχρα (ṓkhra) from ὠχρός (ōkhrós) 'pale') is a family of natural clay earth pigments, made up of ferric oxide and varying amounts of clay and sand, ranging in colour from yellow to deep orange or brown. The term is also used for the colours produced by this pigment, especially a light brownish-yellow. A variant of ochre containing a large amount of hematite, or dehydrated iron oxide, has a reddish tint known as red ochre (or, in some dialects in England, ruddle). The term "ochre" is colloquially used to cover a range of different substances used for their colours in Aboriginal Australian art and ceremonial decoration, for instance the clay known as "white ochre" or "pipe clay" is derived from kaolin or gypsum.
Terminology
Ochre (sometimes "ocher" in American English,) is a natural clay earth pigment, consisting of a mixture of ferric oxide and varying amounts of clay and sand. The family of earth pigments known as ochre includes yellow ochre, red ochre, purple ochre, sienna, and umber. The major ingredient of all the ochres is iron(III) oxide-hydroxide, known as limonite, which gives them a yellow colour. A range of other minerals may also be included in the mixture:
The clays coloured with iron oxide derived during the extraction of tin and copper may also be known as ochre.
The term is also used for the colours produced by this pigment, especially a light brownish-yellow.
The range of colours include:
Yellow ochre, FeO(OH)·nH2O - hydrated iron(III) oxyhydroxide (limonite) also called gold ochre.
Red ochre, Fe2O3·nH2O, takes its reddish colour from the mineral hematite, which is an iron oxide, reddish brown when hydrated.
Purple ochre is a rare variant identical to red ochre chemically but of a different hue caused by different light diffraction properties associated with a greater average particle size.
Brown ochre, also FeO(OH), (goethite), is a partly hydrated iron oxide. Similarly, lepidocrocite — γ-FeO(OH), a secondary mineral, a product of the oxidation of iron ore minerals, found in brown iron ores
Sienna contains both limonite and a small amount of manganese oxide (less than 5%), which makes it darker than ochre.
Umber pigments contain a larger proportion of manganese (5-20%), which makes them a dark brown.
Historical use in art and culture
Prehistory
Over recent decades, red ochre has played a pivotal role in discussions about the cognitive and cultural evolution of early modern humans during the African Middle Stone Age. In Africa, evidence for the processing and use of red ochre pigments has been dated by archaeologists to around 300,000 years ago, the climax of the practice coinciding broadly with the emergence of Homo sapiens. Evidence of ochre's use in Australia is more recent, dated to 50,000 years ago, while new research has uncovered evidence in Asia that is dated to 40,000 years ago.
Archeological evidence highlights that prehistoric populations picked different ochre specifically based on certain qualities such as their colour, texture, and even hardness. In parts of Southern Africa deep red-iron ochres were transported over very long distances even though there was evidence of local deposits, implying that each different pigment had a unique cultural or ritual importance to the people. The specific and purposeful movement of the ochre suggest there were many early long-distance exchange networks among the Middle Stone Age groups (Watts 2002).
A re-examination of artefacts uncovered in 1908 at Le Moustier rock shelters in France has identified Mousterian stone tools that were attached to grips made of ochre and bitumen. The grips were formulated with 55% ground goethite ochre and 45% cooked liquid bitumen to create a mouldable putty that hardened into handles. Earlier excavations at Le Moustier prevent conclusive identification of the archaeological culture and age, but the European Mousterian style of these tools suggests they are associated with Neanderthals during the late Middle Paleolithic, between 60,000 and 35,000 years before present. It is the earliest evidence of compound adhesive use in Europe.
Pieces of ochre engraved with abstract designs have been found at the site of the Blombos Cave in South Africa, dated to around 75,000 years ago. "Mungo Man" (LM3) in Australia was buried sprinkled with red ochre around 40,000 years ago. In Wales, the Paleolithic burial called the Red Lady of Paviland from its coating of red ochre has been dated to around 33,000 years before present. Paintings of animals made with red and yellow ochre pigments have been found in Paleolithic sites at Pech Merle in France (ca. 25,000 years old), and the cave of Altamira in Spain (c. 16,500–15,000 BC). The cave of Lascaux has an image of a horse coloured with yellow ochre estimated to be 17,300 years old. Neolithic burials may have used red ochre pigments symbolically, either to represent a return to the earth or possibly as a form of ritual rebirth, in which the colour may symbolise blood and a hypothesised Great Goddess.
The use of ochre is particularly intensive: it is not unusual to find a layer of the cave floor impregnated with a purplish red to a depth of eight inches. The size of these ochre deposits raises a problem not yet solved. The colouring is so intense that practically all the loose ground seems to consist of ochre. One can imagine that the Aurignacians regularly painted their bodies red, dyed their animal skins, coated their weapons, and sprinkled the ground of their dwellings, and that a paste of ochre was used for decorative purposes in every phase of their domestic life. We must assume no less, if we are to account for the veritable mines of ochre on which some of them lived...
The Gothic historian Jordanes claimed that the ancient Caledonians painted themselves "Iron Red", "whether by way of adornment or perhaps for some other reason".
Ochre has uses other than as paint: "tribal peoples alive today . . . use either as a way to treat animal skins or else as an insect repellent, to staunch bleeding, or as protection from the sun. Ochre may have been the first medicament."
Ancient Egypt
In Ancient Egypt, yellow was associated with gold, which was considered to be eternal and indestructible. The skin and bones of the gods were believed to be made of gold. The Egyptians used yellow ochre extensively in tomb painting, though occasionally they used orpiment, which made a brilliant colour, but was highly toxic, since it was made with arsenic. In tomb paintings, men were always shown with brown faces, women with yellow ochre or gold faces.
Red ochre in Ancient Egypt was used as a rouge, or lip gloss for women. Ochre-coloured lines were also discovered on the Unfinished obelisk at the northern region of the Aswan Stone Quarry, marking work sites. Ochre clays were also used medicinally in Ancient Egypt: such use is described in the Ebers Papyrus from Egypt, dating to about 1550 BC.
Ancient Phoenicia
Pigments, particularly red ochre, were essential to grave rituals in ancient Phoenician society. They were more than just cosmetics; they also had important symbolic and ritualistic connotations. With its vivid colour that was evocative of blood and energy, red ochre represented life, death, and rebirth. It also represented the desire for resurrection and the belief in an afterlife. In order to honor the deceased and get them ready for their passage to the afterlife, these pigments, particularly red ochre, were most likely applied to their body or other grave goods as part of the burial rites. “Phoenicians' love of red is highlighted by the great number of powders of this colour found in the containers. The powders were probably used to give a hue to cheeks or to lips. Besides these uses as make-up powders, we can also assume a ritual use of ointments and powders containing cinnabar or ochre, applied to the face and the forehead during preparation rituals of the bodies. The discovery of red paint traces on bones and skulls suggests that these practices were common among the Phoenicians as for other populations.” Greater-quality pigments and more intricate applications would typically indicate people of greater rank or particular significance within the community. Moreover, the presence and quality of pigments in a burial site may indicate the identity or social standing of the deceased. In addition to acting as offerings to the gods and protective symbols, pigments were employed to adorn grave goods including pottery, amulets, and other objects, so elevating the spiritual purity of the interment. The visual impact of red ochre could also have been intended to preserve the appearance of the body or make it presentable for mourning ceremonies, ensuring that the deceased was honored appropriately. This vivid colour would enhance the overall visual and emotional impact of funerary displays. In essence, the use of red ochre and other pigments in Phoenician funerary contexts highlights their cultural and symbolic importance, reflecting deep-seated beliefs about death, the afterlife, and social hierarchy, thus providing a richer understanding of Phoenician customs and values.
Ancient Greece and Rome
Ochre was the most commonly used pigment for painting walls in the ancient Mediterranean world. In Ancient Greece, red ochre was called μίλτος, míltos (hence Miltiades: "red-haired" or "ruddy"). In ancient Athens when Assembly was called, a contingent of public slaves would sweep the open space of the Agora with ropes dipped in miltos: those citizens that loitered there instead of moving to the Assembly area would risk having their clothes stained with the paint. This prevented them from wearing these clothes in public again, as failure to attend the Assembly incurred a fine.
In England, red ochre was also known as "raddle", "reddle", or "ruddle" and was used to mark sheep and can also be used as a waxy waterproof coating on structures. The reddle was sold as a ready-made mixture to farmers and herders by travelling workers called reddlemen.
In Classical antiquity, the finest red ochre came from a Greek colony on the Black Sea where the modern city of Sinop in Turkey is located. It was carefully regulated, expensive and marked by a special seal, and this colour was called sealed Sinope. Later the Latin and Italian name sinopia was given to wide range of dark red ochre pigments. Roman triumphators painted their faces red, perhaps to imitate the red-painted flesh of statues of the Gods. The Romans used yellow ochre in their paintings to represent gold and skin tones, and as a background colour. It is found frequently in the murals of Pompeii.
New Zealand
The Māori people of New Zealand made extensive use of mineral ochre mixed with fish oil. Red ochre was known as Kōkōwai, and was highly sought after. Other colours, including orange, yellow, and brown were also used, and the ochre was mixed with fish oil to make a paste to smear over their bodies. One of Captain Cook's crew members was recorded as saying: "They paint their faces with a coarse red paint, and oil or grease the head and upper part of the body". After European settlement of New Zealand, the Māori stopped using kōkōwai on their bodies, but continued to use it for decoration and preservation of wooden canoes known as waka, as well as buildings and tombs. The combination of kokowai and shark oil repelled sandflies, and was believed to keep away the patupaiarehe (supernatural beings), and the colour was regarded as sacred.
They also used it as a dye, sometimes using it to dye a cloak known as the korowai, and in their hair.
The main ochre deposits were at Parapara in Golden Bay / Mohua, which brought European enterprise to the area in the 1870s. The Washbourn family founded the New Zealand Haematite Paint Company, using the ochres as high-quality pigment. The Nelson Paint Company was the last to extract pigment from the site, in 1930.
Indigenous North America
In Newfoundland its use is most often associated with the Beothuk, whose use of red ochre led them to be referred to as "Red Indians" by the first Europeans to Newfoundland. The Beothuk may have also used yellow ochre to colour their hair. It was also used by the Maritime Archaic as evidenced by its discovery in the graves of over 100 individuals during an archaeological excavation at Port au Choix. Its use was widespread at times in the Eastern Woodlands cultural area of Canada and the US; the Red Ocher people complex refers to a specific archaeological period in the Woodlands c. 1000–400 BC. California Native Americans such as the Tongva and Chumash were also known to use red ochre as body paint. Researchers diving into dark submerged caves on Mexico's Yucatán Peninsula have found evidence of an ambitious mining operation starting 12,000 years ago and lasting two millennia for red ochre.
Renaissance
During the Renaissance, yellow and red ochre pigments were widely used in painting panels and frescoes. The colours vary greatly from region to region, depending upon whether the local clay was richer in yellowish limonite or reddish hematite. The red earth from Pozzuoli near Naples was a salmon pink, while the pigment from Tuscany contained manganese, making it a darker reddish brown called terra di siena, or sienna earth.
The 15th-century painter Cennino Cennini described the uses of ochre pigments in his famous treatise on painting. This pigment is found in the earth of mountains, where particular seams like sulphur are found. And there, where these seams are, sinopia, green earth and other types of pigment are found...And the abovementioned pigments running through this landscape looked as a scar on the face of a man or of a woman looks...I went in behind with my little knife, prospecting at the scar of this pigment; and in this way, I promise you, I never sampled a more lovely and perfect ochre pigment...And know that this ochre is a common pigment, particularly when working in fresco; that with other mixtures that, as i will explain to you, it is used for flesh colours, for drapery, for coloured mountains and buildings and hair and in general for many things.
In early modern Malta, red ochre paint was commonly used on public buildings.
Colonial North America
In Newfoundland, red ochre was the pigment of choice for use in vernacular outbuildings and work buildings associated with the cod fishery. Deposits of ochre are found throughout Newfoundland, notably near Fortune Harbour and at Ochre Pit Cove. While earliest settlers may have used locally collected ochre, people were later able to purchase pre-ground ochre through local merchants, largely imported from England.
The dry ingredient, ochre, was mixed with some type of liquid raw material to create a rough paint. The liquid material was usually seal oil or cod liver oil in Newfoundland and Labrador, while Scandinavian recipes sometimes called for linseed oil. Red ochre paint was sometimes prepared months in advance and allowed to sit, and the smell of ochre paint being prepared is still remembered today.
Variations in local recipes, shades of ore, and type of oil used resulted in regional variations in colour. Because of this, it is difficult to pinpoint an exact shade or hue of red that would be considered the traditional "fishing stage red". In the Bonavista Bay area one man maintained that seal oil mixed with the ochre gave the sails a purer red colour, while cod liver oil would give a "foxy" colour, browner in hue.
Past and continuing use
Africa
Red ochre has been used as a colouring agent in Africa for over 200,000 years. Women of the Himba ethnic group in Namibia use a mix of ochre and animal fat for body decoration, to achieve a reddish skin colour. The ochre mixture is also applied to their hair after braiding. Men and women of the Maasai people in Kenya and Tanzania have also used ochre in the same way.
Australia
Ochre pigments are plentiful across Australia, especially the Western Desert, Kimberley, and Arnhem Land regions, and occur in many archaeological sites. The practice of ochre painting has been prevalent among Aboriginal Australians for over 40,000 years. Pleistocene burials with red ochre date as early as 40,000 BP and ochre plays a role in expressing symbolic ideologies of the earliest arrivals to the continent. Ochre has been used for millennia by Aboriginal people for body decoration, sun protection, mortuary practices, cave painting, bark painting and other artwork, and the preservation of animal skins, among other uses. At Lake Mungo, in Western New South Wales, burial sites have been excavated and burial materials, including ochre-painted bones, have been dated to the arrival of people in Australia; "Mungo Man" (LM3) was buried sprinkled with red ochre at least 30,000 BP, and possibly as early as 60,000 BP.
Ochre has been mined by Aboriginal people in pits and quarries across Australia; there are over 400 recorded sites, and many of these (including the Ochre Pits in the Tjoritja / West MacDonnell National Park) are still in use. The National Museum of Australia has a large collection of ochre samples from many sites across Australia.
Ochre was traded across the continent through the network of ancient songlines, with highly prized red ochre being sourced from spiritually significant places.
The Yirrkala Bark Petitions, "one of the most significant actions by Aboriginal people in modern history", sent to the Australian Parliament by the Yolngu people of North East Arnhem Land in the Northern Territory in 1963 to negotiate land rights, were decorated with traditional ochre designs.
In Australia, the term "ochre" is applied to a range of coloured substances used in art and decoration in ceremonial activities, some of which are chemically different (and all have different names in different Australian Aboriginal languages). Ochres continue to be used in Aboriginal art and for ceremonial decoration. The most common colours are red, yellow, white, and black, but other colours such as orange, purple, pink and turquoise are also used. Different colours are associated with specific meanings and uses, for example white is often used during times of "sorry business" and loss, while black pigment (from coal or charcoal) is mainly used for men's business. Patterns drawn on the skin with ochre are specific to a purpose, and regarded as the cultural property of each clan. The clay known as "white ochre", "pipe clay", or "china clay" is derived from kaolinite or gypsum.
Indigenous dance company Bangarra Dance Theatre uses ochre extensively in its performances. It sources its white ochre from the Nuwal ochre pit in Yirrkala, Arnhem Land.
Ochre has been and still is widely used as medicine and, when ingested, some ochres have an antacid effect on the digestive system while others, which are rich in iron, can assist with lethargy and fatigue. Ochre is also often mixed with plant oils and animal fats to create other medicines.
There are many words for ochre in Australian Aboriginal languages throughout Australia, including:
Yolŋu languages (Arnhem Land); which refers to white ochre as gapan
Noongar language (South-Western Western Australia); which calls red and yellow ochre wilgee
Wiradjuri language (New South Wales); which calls red ochre gubarr or gidyi
Yawuru language (Kimberley region, WA); which refers to white/yellow ochre as gumbarri white as larli and red duguldugul (when used in ritual)
Gija language (WA); which refers to white ochre as mawurntu and red ochre as badal
In 2019, a new source of white ochre (gapan) was found when refurbishing the Buku-Larrnngay Mulka Art Centre at Yirrkala.
Modern history
The industrial process for making ochre pigment was developed by the French scientist Jean-Étienne Astier in the 1780s. He was from Roussillon and was fascinated by the cliffs of red and yellow clay in the region. He invented a process to make the pigment on a large scale, using the ochre mines and quarries in Roussillon, Rustrel, and Gargas in the Vaucluse.
After extracting clay of 10-20% ochre from open pits or mines, he washed it to separate ochre from sand, then decanted the mixture into large basins. The water was then drained, and the ochre was dried, cut into bricks, crushed, sifted, and classified by colour and quality. The best quality was reserved for artists' pigments.
Thanks to the process invented by Astier and refined by his successors, ochre pigments from Vaucluse were exported across Europe and around the world. It was not only used for artists paints and house paints; it also became an important ingredient for the early rubber industry.
Ochre from Vaucluse was an important French export until the mid-20th century, when major markets were lost due to the Russian Revolution and the Spanish Civil War. Ochre also began to face growing competition from synthetic pigments. The quarries in Roussillon, Rustrel, and Bruoux closed one by one. The last active quarry is in Gargas and belongs to the Société des Ocres de France.
In Great Britain, ochre was mined at Brixham, England. It became an important product for the British fishing industry, where it was combined with oil and used to coat sails to protect them from seawater, giving them a reddish colour. The ochre was boiled in great caldrons, together with tar, tallow, and oak bark, the last ingredient giving the name of barking yards to the places where the hot mixture was painted on to the sails, which were then hung up to dry. In 1894, a theft case provided insights into the use of the pigment as a food adulterant in sausage roll production whereby the accused apprentice was taught to soak brown bread in red ochre, salt, and pepper to give the appearance of beef sausage for the filling.
Modern uses
Paint pigment
Ochres are non-toxic and can be used to make an oil paint that dries quickly and covers surfaces thoroughly. Owing to dwindling supplies of the natural product, modern ochre pigments are made using synthetic iron oxide. Pigments which use natural ochre pigments indicate it with the name PY-43 (Pigment yellow 43) or PBr7 on the label, following the Colour Index International system. However, by 2002 there were no longer any suppliers of natural iron oxide pigments registered with the Society of Dyers and Colourists' (UK) Colour Index. Deletion of the two codes was considered, but manufacturers fought to retain the designations for the synthetic versions of the colours.
In heraldry and vexillology
Ochre, both red and yellow, appear as tinctures in South African heraldry; the national coat of arms, adopted in 2000, includes red ochre, while (yellow) ochre appears in the arms of the University of Transkei.
Ochre is also used as a symbol of Aboriginal Australians, and appears on the Flag of the Northern Territory and on the flags of the Taungurung and Aṉangu people.

The Oldowan (or Mode I) was a widespread stone tool archaeological industry during the early Lower Paleolithic spanning the late Pliocene and the first half of the Early Pleistocene. These early tools were simple, usually made by chipping one, or a few, flakes off a stone using another stone. Oldowan tools were used during a period spanning from 2.9 million years ago up until at least 1.7 million years ago (Ma), by ancient hominins (early humans) across much of Africa. This technological industry was followed by the more sophisticated Acheulean industry (two sites associated with Homo erectus at Gona in the Afar Region of Ethiopia dating from 1.5 and 1.26 million years ago have both Oldowan and Acheulean tools).
The term Oldowan is taken from the site of Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, where the first Oldowan stone tools were discovered by the archaeologist Louis Leakey in the 1930s. However, some contemporary archaeologists and palaeoanthropologists prefer to use the term Mode 1 tools to designate pebble tool industries (including Oldowan), with Mode 2 designating bifacially worked tools (including Acheulean handaxes), Mode 3 designating prepared-core tools, and so forth.
Classification of Oldowan tools is still somewhat contentious. Mary Leakey was the first to create a system to classify Oldowan assemblages, and built her system based on prescribed use. The system included choppers, scrapers, and pounders. However, more recent classifications of Oldowan assemblages have been made that focus primarily on manufacture due to the problematic nature of assuming use from stone artefacts. An example is Isaac et al.'s tri-modal categories of "Flaked Pieces" (cores/choppers), "Detached Pieces" (flakes and fragments), "Pounded Pieces" (cobbles utilized as hammerstones, etc.) and "Unmodified Pieces" (manuports, stones transported to sites). Oldowan tools are sometimes called "pebble tools", so named because the blanks chosen for their production already resemble, in pebble form, the final product.
It is not known for sure which hominin species created and used Oldowan tools. Its emergence is often associated with the species Australopithecus garhi and its flourishing with early species of Homo such as H. habilis and H. ergaster. Early Homo erectus appears to inherit Oldowan technology and refines it into the Acheulean industry beginning 1.7 million years ago.
Dates and ranges
The oldest known Oldowan tools have been found at Nyayanga on the Homa Peninsula in Kenya and are dated to ~2.9 million years ago (Ma). The Oldowan tools were associated with Paranthropus teeth and two butchered hippo skeletons. Early Oldowan tools are also known from Gona in Ethiopia (near the Awash River), and are dated to about 2.6 Ma.
The use of tools by apes including chimpanzees and orangutans can be used to argue in favour of tool-use as an ancestral feature of the hominin family. Tools made from bone, wood, or other organic materials were therefore in all probability used before the Oldowan. Oldowan stone tools are simply the oldest recognisable tools which have been preserved in the archaeological record.
There is a flourishing of Oldowan tools in eastern Africa, spreading to southern Africa, between 2.4 and 1.7 Ma. At 1.7 Ma., the first Acheulean tools appear even as Oldowan assemblages continue to be produced. Both technologies are occasionally found in the same areas, dating to the same time periods. This realisation required a rethinking of old cultural sequences in which the more "advanced" Acheulean was supposed to have succeeded the Oldowan. The different traditions may have been used by different species of hominins living in the same area, or multiple techniques may have been used by an individual species in response to different circumstances.
Sometime before 1.8 Ma Homo erectus had spread outside of Africa, reaching as far east as Java by 1.8 Ma and in Northern China by 1.66 Ma. In these newly colonised areas, no Acheulean assemblages have been found. In China, only "Mode 1" Oldowan assemblages were produced, while in Indonesia stone tools from this age are unknown.
By 1.8 Ma early Homo was present in Europe, as shown by the discovery of fossil remains and Oldowan tools in Dmanisi, Georgia. Remains of their activities have also been excavated in Spain at sites in the Guadix-Baza basin and near Atapuerca. Most early European sites yield "Mode 1" or Oldowan assemblages. The earliest Acheulean sites in Europe only appear around 0.5 Ma. In addition, the Acheulean tradition does not seem to spread to Eastern Asia. It is unclear from the archaeological record when the production of Oldowan technologies ended. Other tool-making traditions seem to have supplanted Oldowan technologies by 0.25 Ma.
The discovery of stone tools that predate the Oldowan, dated to as early as 3.3 Ma, at the Lomekwi site in Kenya, was announced in 2015.
This age pre-dates the current estimates for the age of the genus Homo by half a million years, and would fall into the pre-human period,
associated with the direct australopithecine ancestors of genus Homo. It is not clear whether the tools of such a "Lomekwian industry" bear any relation to the Oldowan industry.
Tools
Manufacture
There are articles that address how some Oldowan tools may have been found as stones with naturally occurring shapes that dictate their ideal use, or formed as such. To form the general shape of an Oldowan tool, a roughly spherical hammerstone is struck on the edge, or striking platform, of a suitable core rock to produce a conchoidal fracture with sharp edges useful for various purposes. The process is often called lithic reduction. The chip removed by the blow is the flake. Some of these flakes can be used as tools, provided the aforementioned conditions for the initial stone are met before modification. Below the point of impact on the core is a characteristic bulb with fine fissures on the fracture surface. The flake evidences ripple marks.
The materials of the tools were for the most part quartz, quartzite, basalt, or obsidian, and later flint and chert. Any rock that can hold an edge will do. The main source of these rocks is river cobbles, which provide both hammer stones and striking platforms. The earliest tools were simply split cobbles. It is not always clear which is the flake. Later tool-makers clearly identified and reworked flakes. Complaints that artifacts could not be distinguished from naturally fractured stone have helped spark careful studies of Oldowan techniques. These techniques have now been duplicated many times by archaeologists and other knappers, making misidentification of archaeological finds less likely.
Use of bone tools by hominins also producing Oldowan tools is known from Swartkrans, where a bone shaft with a polished point was discovered in Member (layer) I, dated 1.8–1.5 Ma. The Osteodontokeratic industry, the "bone-tooth-horn" industry hypothesized by Raymond Dart, is less certain.
Shapes and uses
Mary Leakey classified the Oldowan tools as Heavy Duty, Light Duty, Utilized Pieces and Debitage, or waste. Heavy-duty tools are mainly cores. A chopper has an edge on one side. It is unifacial if the edge was created by flaking on one face of the core, or bifacial if on two. Discoid tools are roughly circular with a peripheral edge. Polyhedral tools are edged in the shape of a polyhedron. In addition there are spheroidal hammer stones.
Light-duty tools are mainly flakes. There are scrapers, awls (with points for boring) and burins (with points for engraving). Some of these functions belong also to heavy-duty tools. For example, there are heavy-duty scrapers.
Utilized pieces are tools that began with one purpose in mind but were utilized opportunistically. Because of their use and variation, opportunities lead to the frequent modification of tools for either labor or forms of signaling has been proposed as a cause for the different shapes of similar tools.
Oldowan tools were probably used for many purposes, which have been discovered from observation of modern apes and hunter-gatherers. Nuts and bones are cracked by hitting them with hammer stones on a stone used as an anvil. Battered and pitted stones testify to this possible use.
Heavy-duty tools could be used as axes for woodworking. Once a branch was separated, it could be scraped clean with a scraper, or hollowed with pointed tools. Such uses are attested by characteristic microscopic alterations of edges used to scrape wood. Oldowan tools could also have been used for preparing hides. Hides must be cut by slicing, piercing and scraping them clean of residues. Flakes are most suitable for this purpose.
Lawrence Keeley, following in the footsteps of Sergei Semenov, conducted microscopic studies (with a high-powered optical microscope) on the edges of tools manufactured de novo and used for the originally speculative purposes described above. He found that the marks were characteristic of the use and matched marks on prehistoric tools. Studies of the cut marks on bones using an electron microscope produce a similar result.
Abbevillian
Abbevillian is a currently obsolescent name for a tool tradition that is increasingly coming to be called Oldowan. The label Abbevillian prevailed until the Leakey family discovered older (yet similar) artifacts at Olduvai Gorge and promoted the African origin of man. Oldowan soon replaced Abbevillian in describing African and Asian lithics. The term Abbevillian is still used but is now restricted to Europe. The label, however, continues to lose popularity as a scientific designation.
In the late 20th century, discovery of the discrepancies in date caused a crisis of definition. Because Abbevillian did not necessarily precede Acheulean and both traditions had flakes and bifaces, it became difficult to differentiate the two. It was in this spirit that many artifacts formerly considered Abbevillian were labeled Acheulean. In consideration of the difficulty, some preferred to name both phases Acheulean. When the topic of Abbevillian came up, it was simply put down as a phase of Acheulean. Whatever was from Africa was Oldowan, and whatever from Europe, Acheulean.
The solution to the definition problem is to define the types in terms of complexity. Simply struck tools are Oldowan. Retouched, or reworked tools are Acheulean. Retouching is a second working of the artifact. The manufacturer first creates an Oldowan tool. Then he reworks or retouches the edges by removing very small chips so as to straighten and sharpen the edge. Typically but not necessarily the reworking is accomplished by pressure flaking.
Tool users
The exact hominid responsible for the archaeological evidence is up for debate; pseudoscientists claim only the genus Homo line was intelligent enough to develop Oldowan tools, though this is largely due to religious bias with intelligent design components. Despite this conjecture, copious fossil evidence showed evolutionary features for human precision grip capabilities in Australopithecines. This leads to current anthropological thinking in which Oldowan tools were made by late Australopithecus and early Homo. Homo habilis was named "skillful" because it was considered the earliest tool-using human ancestor.
Indeed, the genus Homo was in origin intended to separate tool-using species from their tool-less predecessors, hence the name of Australopithecus garhi, garhi meaning "surprise", a tool-using Australopithecine discovered in 1996 and described as the "missing link" between the genera Australopithecus and Homo. There is also evidence that some species of Paranthropus utilized stone tools.
There is presently no evidence to show that Oldowan tools were the sole creation of members of the Homo line or that the ability to produce them was a special characteristic of only our ancestors. Research on tool use by modern wild chimpanzees in West Africa shows there is an operational sequence when chimpanzees use lithic implements to crack nuts. In the course of nut cracking, sometimes they will create unintentional flakes. Although the morphology of the chimpanzees' hammer is different from the Oldowan hammer, chimpanzees' ability to use stone tools indicates that the earliest lithic industries were probably not produced by only one kind of hominin species.
Findings from fossil evidence and experimental replication of stone-tool users and manufacturers suggest the presence of physical characteristics of hand morphology for precise stone tool making. The makers of Oldowan tools were mainly right-handed. "Handedness" (lateralization) had thus already evolved, though it is not clear how related to modern lateralization it was, since other animals show handedness as well.
In the mid-1970s, Glynn Isaac touched off a debate by proposing that human ancestors of this period had a "place of origin" and that they foraged outward from this home base, returning with high-quality food to share and to be processed. Over the course of the last 30 years, a variety of competing theories about how foraging occurred have been proposed, each one implying certain kinds of social strategy. The available evidence from the distribution of tools and remains is not enough to decide which theories are the most probable. However, three main groups of theories predominate.
Glynn Isaac's model became the Central Forage Point, as he responded to critics that accused him of attributing too much "modern" behavior to early hominins with relatively free-form searches outward.
A second group of models took modern chimpanzee behavior as a starting point, having the hominids use relatively fixed routes of foraging, and leaving tools where it was best to do so on a constant track.
A third group of theories had relatively loose bands scouring the range, taking care to move carcasses from dangerous death sites and leaving tools more or less at random.
Each group of models implies different grouping and social strategies, from the relative altruism of central base models to the relatively disjointed search models. (See also central foraging theory and Lewis Binford.)
Hominins probably lived in social groups that had contact with others. This conclusion is supported by the large number of bones at many sites, too large to be the work of one individual, and all of the scatter patterns implying many different individuals. Since modern primates in Africa have fluid boundaries between groups, as individuals enter, become the focus of bands, and others leave, it is also probable that the tools we find are the result of many overlapping groups working the same territories, and perhaps competing over them. Because of the huge expanse of time and the multiplicity of species associated with possible Oldowan tools, it is difficult to be more precise than this, since it is almost certain that different social groupings were used at different times and in different places.
There is also the question of what mix of hunting, gathering and scavenging the tool users employed. Early models focused on the tool users as hunters. The animals butchered by the tools include waterbuck, hartebeest, springbok, pig and zebra. However, the disposition of the bones allows some question about hominin methods of obtaining meat. That they were omnivores is unquestioned, as the digging implement and the probable use of hammer stones to smash nuts indicate. Lewis Binford first noticed that the bones at Olduvai contained a disproportionately high incidence of extremities, which are low in food substance. He concluded other predators had taken the best meat, and the hominins had only scavenged. The counter view is that while hunting many large animals would be beyond the reach of an individual human, groups could bring down larger game, as pack hunting animals are capable of doing. Moreover, since many animals both hunt and scavenge, it is possible that hominins hunted smaller animals, but were not above driving carnivores from larger kills, as they probably were driven from kills themselves from time to time.
Sites and archaeologists
A complete catalog of Oldowan sites would be too extensive for listing here. Some of the better-known sites include the following:
Africa
Ethiopia
Afar Triangle
Sites in the Gona river system in the Hadar region of the Afar triangle, excavated by Helene Roche, J. W. Harris and Sileshi Semaw, yielded some of the oldest known Oldowan assemblages, dating to about 2.6 million years ago. Raw material analysis done by Semaw showed that some assemblages in this region are biased towards a certain material (e.g.: 70% of the artifacts at sites EG10 and EG12 were composed of trachyte) indicating a selectivity in the quality of stone used. Recent excavations have yielded tools in association with cut-marked bones, indicating that Oldowan were used in meat-processing or -acquiring activities.
Omo River basin
The second oldest known Oldowan tool site comes from the Shungura Formation of the Omo River basin. This formation documents the sediments of the Plio-Pleistocene and provides a record of the hominins that lived there. Lithic assemblages have been classified as Oldowan in members E and F in the lower Omo basin. Although there have been lithic assemblages found in multiple sites in these areas, only the Omo sites 57 and 123 in member F are accepted as hominin lithic remains. The assemblages at Omo sites 71 and 84 in member E do not show evidence of hominin modification and are therefore classified as natural assemblages.
The tools are never found in direct association with the hominins, but archaeologists believe that they would be the strongest candidates for tool manufacture. There are no hominins in those layers, but the same layers elsewhere in the Omo valley contain Paranthropus and early Homo fossils. Paranthropus occurs in the preceding layers. In the last layer at 1.4 million years ago is only Homo erectus.
Egypt
Along the Nile River, within the 100-foot terrace, evidence of Chellean or Oldowan cultures has been found.
Algeria
In November 2018 Science published a report of Oldowan artefacts in a secure dating context of 1.9 to 2.4 Ma from Ain Boucherit (Ain Hanech) in Setif.
Kenya
Homa Peninsula
Kanjera South, part of the Kanjera site complex, and Nyayanga are located on the Homa Peninsula. Kanjera South is estimated to around 2 Ma. while Nyayanga is estimated to 2.9 Ma. One of the significant excavations, in the area, is Leakey's expedition in 1932–35. In 1995, Oldowan and Plio-Pleistocene faunal remains surfaced from the site. and in 2015 excavations led to the discovery of the earliest Oldowan stone tool technology in association with Paranthropus fossils and butchered hippo remains from Nyayanga.
East Turkana
The numerous Koobi Fora sites on the east side of Lake Turkana are now part of Sibiloi National Park. Sites were initially excavated by Richard Leakey, Meave Leakey, Jack Harris, Glynn Isaac and others. Currently the artifacts found are classified as Oldowan or KBS Oldowan dated from 1.9 to 1.7 Ma, Karari (or "advanced Oldowan") dated to 1.6–1.4 Ma, and some early Acheulean at the end of the Karari. Over 200 hominins have been found, including Australopithecus and Homo.
West Turkana
In the Nachukui site in West Turkana, around 500 stone tools were found at a site named Naiyena Engol 2, or NY2. The assemblage at NY2 dates back to 1.8–1.7 Ma, around the peak of the Oldowan period. At the site, freehand flaking was observed to be the most common type of technique for making these tools. A common theme among sites in West Turkana is the high percentage of small flake tools gathered in the assemblages. However, NY2 seems to lack many of these tools, indicating a low productivity rate of flakes.
Kilombe
Acheulian stone tools have been known about at Kilombe Main site in the central rift of Kenya since the 1970s with excavations by John Gowlett for his PhD. More recently, Oldowan technology has also been discovered in Kilombe Caldera in an unusual high altitude setting. The stone tools are associated with fossils and have been dated to 1.8 Ma, with Acheulian stone tools occurring in overlying levels.
Tanzania
Olduvai Gorge
The Oldowan industry is named after discoveries made in the Olduvai Gorge of Tanzania in east Africa by the Leakey family, primarily Mary Leakey, but also her husband Louis and their son, Richard. Mary Leakey organized a typology of Early Pleistocene stone tools, which developed Oldowan tools into three chronological variants, A, B and C. Developed Oldowan B is of particular interest due to changes in morphology that appear to have been driven mostly by the short term availability of a chert resource from 1.65 to 1.53 Ma. The flaking properties of this new resource resulted in considerably more core reduction and a higher prevalence of flake retouch. Similar tools had already been found in various locations in Europe and Asia for some time, where they were called Chellean and Abbevillian.
The oldest tool sites are in the East African Rift system, on the sediments of ancient streams and lakes. This is consistent with what we surmise of the evolution of man.
South Africa
Abbé Breuil was the first recognized archaeologist to go on record to assert the existence of Oldowan tools. While his description was for "Chello-Abbevillean" tools, and post-dated Leakey's finds at Olduvai Gorge by at least ten years, his descriptions nonetheless represented the scholarly acceptance of this technology as legitimate. These findings were cited as being from the location of the Vaal River, at Vereeniging, and Breuil noted the distinct absence of a significant number of cores, suggesting a "portable culture". At the time, this was considered very significant, as portability supported the conclusion that the Oldowan tool-makers were capable of planning for future needs, by creating the tools in a location which was distant from their use.
Swartkrans
The Swartkrans site is a cave filled with layered fossil-bearing limestone deposits. Oldowan is found in Member 1 Lower Bank at 2.2-1.8 Ma in association with Paranthropus robustus and a single fossil attributed to Homo . The Member I assemblage also includes a shaft of pointed bone polished at the pointed end. Member I contained a high percentage of primate remains compared to other animal remains, which did not fit the hypothesis that H. habilis or P. robustus lived in the cave. C. K. Brain conducted a more detailed study and discovered the cave had been the abode of leopards, who preyed on the hominins.
Sterkfontein
Another site of limestone caves is Sterkfontein, found in South Africa. This site contains a large number of not only Oldowan tools, but also early Acheulean technology.
Drimolen
The cave site of Drimolen has yielded 6 stone tools attributed to the Oldowan as well as 65 bone tools, along with specimens of Paranthropus robustus and Homo erectus
Europe
Georgia
In 1999 and 2002, two Homo erectus skulls (H. georgicus) were discovered at Dmanisi in southern Georgia. The archaeological layer in which the human remains, hundreds of Oldowan stone tools, and numerous animal bones were unearthed is dated approximately 1.83-1.6 Ma. The site yields the earliest unequivocal evidence for presence of early humans outside the African continent.
Bulgaria
At Kozarnika, in the ground layers, dated to 1.6-1.4 Ma, archaeologists have discovered a human molar tooth, lower palaeolithic assemblages that belong to a core-and-flake non-Acheulian industry and incised bones that may be the earliest example of human symbolic behaviour.
Russia
Ainikab-1 and Muhkay-2 (North Caucasus, Daghestan) are the extraordinary sites in relation to date and the culture. Geological and geomorphological data, palynological studies and paleomagnetic testing unequivocally point to Early Pleistocene (Eopleistocene), indicating the age of the sites as being within the range of 1.8 – 1.2 Ma.
Spain
Oldowan tools have been found at the following sites: Fuente Nueva 3, Barranco del Leon, Sima del Elefante, Atapuerca TD 6.
France
Oldowan tools have been found at: Lézignan-la-Cèbe, 1.5 Ma; Abbeville, 1–0.5 Ma; Vallonnet cave, French Riviera; Soleihac, open-air site in Massif Central. Oldowan tools have also been found at Tautavel in the foothills of the Pyrenees. These were discovered by Henry de Lumbley alongside human remains (cranium). The tools are of limestone and quartz.
Elsewhere
Oldowan tools have been found in Italy at the Monte Poggiolo open air site dated to approximately 850 ka, making them the oldest evidence of human habitation in Italy. In Germany tools have been found in river gravels at Kärlich dating from 300 ka. In the Czech Republic tools have been found in ancient lake deposits at Przeletice and a cave site at Stranska Skala, dated no later than 500 ka. In Hungary tools have been found at a spring site at Vértesszőlős dating from 500 ka.
Asia
China
At the Xihoudu site in China, 32 stone tools were found, including choppers, scrapers, and 3-edged tools. These tools were dated back to 1.8 Ma. This site also included cultural artifacts, such as animal fossils, burnt bones, and cut antlers. The presence of numerous fish and beaver fossils near the stone tools indicate the existence of a body of water at the site.
Pakistan
In Pakistan, Oldowan tools have been found at Riwat during a 1980s excavation. Many of the stones found at this site were considered waste products of stone tool production, as they were small flakes chipped off of larger stones. In total, 1,479 tools and flakes were discovered at this site.
Syria
An excavated site at El Kowm (Aïn al Fil, (de:Aïn al Fil)), Syria revealed a plethora of Oldowan tools. In a 2m2 test pit excavated in 2008, 790 artifacts were found, with many pebble tools, cores, flakes, manuports, and flake debris. Although many of these tools show little sign of modification, several of the pebble tools are distinctly-shaped bifacial and trifacial choppers. Dated between 2.0 and 1.8 Ma, these stone tools are some of the earliest Near East finds.
Because of their location in the Syrian desert, these tools have raised questions about the path of early hominin dispersal. The predominant theory that early hominins traveled along the Mediterranean, through what is now Israel, into Europe has been challenged, as the presence of these Oldowan tools indicate that an alternate route may have been taken.
Iran
In Iran, 80 tools of different assemblages have been discovered at 7 sites in the Kashafrud Basin. Although many of the artifacts found here, dated at 1.8 Ma, were pre-Acheulean, some are of the Oldowan tradition, resembling East African Oldowan finds. Containing cores, choppers, flake, chunks, and hammer stones made predominately of quartz, this site displayed the ability of early toolmakers to work skillfully with fragile stones.
Israel
The site at Bizat Ruhama (near kibbutz Ruhama) has shown evidence that the complexity of the stone tool-making process was more complex than researchers previously thought, leading to a new perspective on the capabilities of invention and adaptability of Oldowan hominin populations.
Another key find at the Bizat Ruhama site was that of the secondary flakes. The discovery of these secondary flakes have led researchers to believe that this was an intentional response to a raw material constraint.
According to the micro-morphological studies at the Bizat Ruhama site, the archaeological assemblages represent one or several occupations of the site in a relatively short time frame.

On the State of Mining and Metallurgy in the Principalities of Bayreuth and Ansbach in the Year 1792 (Über den Zustand des Bergbaus und Hüttenwesens in den Fürstentümern Bayreuth und Ansbach im Jahre 1792) is an early work by Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859). In this publication, Humboldt provides a report on the condition of mining and metallurgical operations in the Principalities of Bayreuth and Ansbach (see also Ansbach-Bayreuth).
It is listed as one of Humboldt’s major works and was published in 1959 by Akademie-Verlag in Berlin, edited and introduced by Herbert Kühnert in collaboration with Oscar Oelsner.
Introduction
After completing his studies at the Büsch Academy in Hamburg, a commercial school, the young Humboldt submitted a job application in May 1791 to the Prussian Chief Mining Officer Friedrich Anton von Heynitz for a position in the mining administration. He completed his mining studies at the Freiberg Mining Academy in just eight months. During this time, he performed practical mining duties underground and participated in various study groups, including with Abraham Gottlob Werner.
The state minister Karl August von Hardenberg, who resided in Bayreuth, commissioned the newly appointed Mining Assessor Alexander von Humboldt to conduct a survey of the mines and smelters in the newly acquired Prussian provinces.
On June 4, 1792, Humboldt wrote from Berlin to Johann Carl Freiesleben (in translation):
I may leave for Bayreuth and the Fichtel Mountains in just three weeks. I have the honorable task of conducting a geognostic and mining survey of the natural characteristics of both margraviates. I have initially been given only eight weeks to travel through the area and provide the minister with a general overview. What happens next—whether I stay permanently (and become Chief Mining Officer!!) or go to Silesia—is entirely uncertain.
His assessment of the alum shale mining near the Heldenmühle close to Crailsheim was scathing (in translation): “The extraction of this alum shale seam is more irregular and unmining-like than anything I have yet seen in both principalities [Bayreuth and Ansbach].” He proposed (in translation): “4. The new adit as well as the proposed crosscut should be driven into the field as far as there is any hope of finding alum shale, and then mining should proceed from the back to the front, not the other way around, so that (even if the roof collapses) the space for haulage [and the escape route] remains accessible.”
In the local history of the “Alexander von Humboldt town” Goldkronach (in the Bayreuth district), Humboldt’s role in reactivating gold mining is remembered. Mining had been disrupted by the Thirty Years' War and never fully resumed afterward.
Structure
The work is divided as follows:
Preface
On the geological structure of the mountains in the Franconian principalities and mining in general
On mining and metallurgy in the district of Lauenstein and in the mining offices of Naila, Goldkronach, and Wunsiedel
On the peat bogs in the Principality of Bayreuth
On the porcelain factory in Bruckberg near Ansbach
On the vitriol and alum works in Crailsheim and the mine at Heldenmühle
On the shortcomings of the iron industry in Franconia
On the geological structure of the mountains and the saltworks in Gerabronn
On the condition of the saltworks in Schwäbisch Hall
Literature
Alexander von Humboldt: Über den Zustand des Bergbaus und Hüttenwesens in den Fürstentümern Bayreuth und Ansbach im Jahre 1792. Eingeleitet und bearbeitet von Dr. Herbert Kühnert in Verbindung mit Prof. Dr. Oscar Oelsner. Akademie Verlag, Berlin 1959 (= Freiberger Forschungshefte. Herausgegeben vom Rektor der Bergakademie Freiberg. Kultur und Technik, Reihe D 23). – Online
Douglas Botting: Alexander von Humboldt. Biographie eines großen Forschungsreisenden. Prestel, München 1974 (4. Auflage 1989)

Open-source appropriate technology (OSAT) is appropriate technology developed through the principles of the open-design movement. Appropriate technology is technology designed with special consideration for the environmental, ethical, cultural, social, political, and economic aspects of the community it is intended for. Open design is public and licensed to allow it to be used, modified, and distributed freely.
Benefits
Open source is a development method for appropriate technology that utilizes distributed peer review and transparency of the process.
Open-source-appropriate technology has the potential to drive applied sustainability.
The built-in continuous peer review can result in better quality, higher reliability, and more flexibility than conventional design or patenting of technologies.
The accessible nature of the knowledge provides lower costs, particularly for those technologies that benefit little from the scale of manufacture.
OSAT enables the end of predatory intellectual property lock-in. This is important for relieving suffering and saving lives in the developing world.
In an article published on Harvard Business Review, Vasilis Kostakis and Andreas Roos argue that the "open-source" model can act as a driver of sustainable development since it enables localization for communities that do not have the resources to tempt commercial developers to provide local versions of their products, minimizing the need to ship materials over long distances and organizing material activities accordingly. Local manufacturing would also make maintenance easier and encourage manufacturers to design products to last as long as possible. The technology can be both "gratis" and "libre," i.e., free of both the monetary cost and contractual restrictions often associated with commercial technologies and patents. That freedom can be an important consideration for developing communities. According to the concepts of Jeremy Rifkin, it thus optimizes the sharing of knowledge and design as there are no patent costs to pay for.
Ethical considerations
For solutions, many researchers, companies, and academics work on products meant to assist sustainable development. The ethics of information sharing in this context have been explored in depth.
Support in the literature
It has been investigated how open sharing of designs, specifications, and technical information can enhance effectiveness, widespread use, and innovation of appropriate technology.
OSAT has been proposed as a new model of enabling innovation for sustainable development.
OSAT has been claimed to assist in development of medical technology particularly for the developing world.
It has been claimed that the sharing of design processes, appropriate tools, and technical information enables more effective and rapid development of appropriate technologies for both industrialized and non-industrialized regions. In addition, it is claimed that this sharing will require the appropriate-technology community to adopt open standards/licenses, document knowledge, and build on previous work.
OSAT can be used to generate renewable energy
OSAT in ICT
OSAT and peer production
In education
The Appropedia Foundation is a non-profit organization running Appropedia, the largest wiki documenting schematics, ideas, observations, experimental data, deployment logs etc. about patent-free appropriate technology, permaculture and related subjects.
At the university level, the use of open-source-appropriate technology classroom projects has been shown to be successful in forging the connection between physics and social benefit. This approach has the potential to use students' access to resources and testing equipment in furthering the development of appropriate technology. Similarly, OSAT has been used for improving service learning. MIT studied the usefulness of appropriate technology in education and its relation to OSAT.
It has been proposed that the evolution of the open-source 3D printers can enable a new method of development for OSAT.
To create new and improved products factors a number of factors must be considered, such as fracture mechanics, ergonomics, and user centered design. In addition the use of smart materials like graphene maybe considered for overall improvement of the product.
Evaluation
Appropriate technology is designed to promote decentralized, labor-intensive, energy-efficient and environmentally sound businesses. Carroll Pursell says that the movement declined from 1965 to 1985, due to an inability to counter advocates of agribusiness, large private utilities, and multinational construction companies. Recently (2011), several barriers to OSAT deployment have been identified:
AT seen as inferior or "poor person's" technology
Technical transferability and robustness of AT
Insufficient funding
Weak institutional support
The challenges of distance and time in tackling rural poverty

Ore is natural rock or sediment that contains one or more valuable minerals, typically including metals, concentrated above background levels, and that is economically viable to mine and process. Ore grade refers to the concentration of the desired material it contains. The value of the metals or minerals a rock contains must be weighed against the cost of extraction to determine whether it is of sufficiently high grade to be worth mining and is therefore considered an ore. A complex ore is one containing more than one valuable mineral.
Minerals of interest are generally oxides, sulfides, silicates, or native metals such as copper or gold. Ore bodies are formed by a variety of geological processes generally referred to as ore genesis and can be classified based on their deposit type. Ore is extracted from the earth through mining and treated or refined, often via smelting, to extract the valuable metals or minerals. Some ores, depending on their composition, may pose threats to health or surrounding ecosystems.
The word ore is of Anglo-Saxon origin, meaning "lump of metal".
Gangue and tailings
In most cases, an ore does not consist entirely of a single mineral, but is mixed with other valuable minerals and with unwanted or valueless rocks and minerals. The part of an ore that is not economically desirable and that cannot be avoided in mining is known as gangue. The valuable ore minerals are separated from the gangue minerals by froth flotation, gravity concentration, electric or magnetic methods, and other operations known collectively as mineral processing or ore dressing.
Mineral processing consists of first liberation, to free the ore from the gangue, and concentration to separate the desired mineral(s) from it. Once processed, the gangue is known as tailings, which are useless but potentially harmful materials produced in great quantity, especially from lower grade deposits.
Ore deposits
An ore deposit is an economically significant accumulation of minerals within a host rock. This is distinct from a mineral resource in that it is a mineral deposit occurring in high enough concentration to be economically viable. An ore deposit is one occurrence of a particular ore type. Most ore deposits are named according to their location, or after a discoverer (e.g. the Kambalda nickel shoots are named after drillers), or after some whimsy, a historical figure, a prominent person, a city or town from which the owner came, something from mythology (such as the name of a god or goddess) or the code name of the resource company which found it (e.g. MKD-5 was the in-house name for the Mount Keith nickel sulphide deposit).
Classification
Ore deposits are classified according to various criteria developed via the study of economic geology, or ore genesis. The following is a general categorization of the main ore deposit types:
Magmatic deposits
Magmatic deposits are ones which originate directly from magma
Pegmatites are very coarse grained, igneous rocks. They crystallize slowly at great depth beneath the surface, leading to their very large crystal sizes. Most are of granitic composition. They are a large source of industrial minerals such as quartz, feldspar, spodumene, petalite, and rare lithophile elements.
Carbonatites are an igneous rock whose volume is made up of over 50% carbonate minerals. They are produced from mantle derived magmas, typically at continental rift zones. They contain more rare earth elements than any other igneous rock, and as such are a major source of light rare earth elements.
Magmatic Sulfide Deposits form from mantle melts which rise upwards, and gain sulfur through interaction with the crust. This causes the sulfide minerals present to be immiscible, precipitating out when the melt crystallizes. Magmatic sulfide deposits can be subdivided into two groups by their dominant ore element:
Ni-Cu, found in komatiites, anorthosite complexes, and flood basalts. This also includes the Sudbury Nickel Basin, the only known astrobleme source of such ore.
Platinum Group Elements (PGE) from large mafic intrusions and tholeiitic rock.
Stratiform Chromites are strongly linked to PGE magmatic sulfide deposits. These highly mafic intrusions are a source of chromite, the only chromium ore. They are so named due to their strata-like shape and formation via layered magmatic injection into the host rock. Chromium is usually located within the bottom of the intrusion. They are typically found within intrusions in continental cratons, the most famous example being the Bushveld Complex in South Africa.
Podiform Chromitites are found in ultramafic oceanic rocks resulting from complex magma mixing. They are hosted in serpentine and dunite rich layers and are another source of chromite.
Kimberlites are a primary source for diamonds. They originate from depths of 150 km in the mantle and are mostly composed of crustal xenocrysts, high amounts of magnesium, other trace elements, gases, and in some cases diamond.
Metamorphic deposits
These are ore deposits which form as a direct result of metamorphism.
Skarns occur in numerous geologic settings worldwide. They are silicates derived from the recrystallization of carbonates like limestone through contact or regional metamorphism, or fluid related metasomatic events. Not all are economic, but those with potential value are classified depending on the dominant element such as Ca, Fe, Mg, or Mn among many others. They are one of the most diverse and abundant mineral deposits. As such they are classified solely by their common mineralogy, mainly garnets and pyroxenes.
Greisens, like skarns, are a metamorphosed silicate, quartz-mica mineral deposit. Formed from a granitic protolith due to alteration by intruding magmas, they are large ore sources of tin and tungsten in the form of wolframite, cassiterite, stannite and scheelite.
Porphyry copper deposits
These are the leading source of copper ore. Porphyry copper deposits form along convergent boundaries and are thought to originate from the partial melting of subducted oceanic plates and subsequent concentration of Cu, driven by oxidation. These are large, round, disseminated deposits containing on average 0.8% copper by weight.
Hydrothermal Hydrothermal deposits are a large source of ore. They form as a result of the precipitation of dissolved ore constituents out of fluids.
Mississippi Valley-Type (MVT) deposits precipitate from relatively cool, basal brinal fluids within carbonate strata. These are sources of lead and zinc sulphide ore.
Sediment-Hosted Stratiform Copper Deposits (SSC) form when copper sulphides precipitate out of brinal fluids into sedimentary basins near the equator. These are the second most common source of copper ore after porphyry copper deposits, supplying 20% of the worlds copper in addition to silver and cobalt.
Volcanogenic massive sulphide (VMS) deposits form on the seafloor from precipitation of metal rich solutions, typically associated with hydrothermal activity. They take the general form of a large sulphide rich mound above disseminated sulphides and viens. VMS deposits are a major source of zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), lead (Pb), silver (Ag), and gold (Au).
Sedimentary exhalative sulphide deposits (SEDEX) are a copper sulphide ore which form in the same manor as VMS from metal rich brine but are hosted within sedimentary rocks and are not directly related to volcanism.
Orogenic gold deposits are a bulk source for gold, with 75% of gold production originating from orogenic gold deposits. Formation occurs during late stage mountain building (see orogeny) where metamorphism forces gold containing fluids into joints and fractures where they precipitate. These tend to be strongly correlated with quartz veins.
Epithermal vein deposits form in the shallow crust from concentration of metal bearing fluids into veins and stockworks where conditions favour precipitation. These volcanic related deposits are a source of gold and silver ore, the primary precipitants.
Sedimentary deposits
Laterites form from the weathering of highly mafic rock near the equator. They can form in as little as one million years and are a source of iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), and aluminum (Al). They may also be a source of nickel and cobalt when the parent rock is enriched in these elements.
Banded iron formations (BIFs) are the highest concentration of any single metal available. They are composed of chert beds alternating between high and low iron concentrations. Their deposition occurred early in Earth's history when the atmospheric composition was significantly different from today. Iron rich water is thought to have upwelled where it oxidized to Fe (III) in the presence of early photosynthetic plankton producing oxygen. This iron then precipitated out and deposited on the ocean floor. The banding is thought to be a result of changing plankton population.
Sediment Hosted Copper forms from the precipitation of a copper rich oxidized brine into sedimentary rocks. These are a source of copper primarily in the form of copper-sulfide minerals.
Placer deposits are the result of weathering, transport, and subsequent concentration of a valuable mineral via water or wind. They are typically sources of gold (Au), platinum group elements (PGE), sulfide minerals, tin (Sn), tungsten (W), and rare-earth elements (REEs). A placer deposit is considered alluvial if formed via river, colluvial if by gravity, and eluvial when close to their parent rock.
Manganese nodules
Polymetallic nodules, also called manganese nodules, are mineral concretions on the sea floor formed of concentric layers of iron and manganese hydroxides around a core. They are formed by a combination of diagenetic and sedimentary precipitation at the estimated rate of about a centimeter over several million years. The average diameter of a polymetallic nodule is between 3 and 10 cm (1 and 4 in) in diameter and are characterized by enrichment in iron, manganese, heavy metals, and rare earth element content when compared to the Earth's crust and surrounding sediment. The proposed mining of these nodules via remotely operated ocean floor trawling robots has raised a number of ecological concerns.
Extraction
The extraction of ore deposits generally follows these steps. Progression from stages 1–3 will see a continuous disqualification of potential ore bodies as more information is obtained on their viability:
Prospecting to find where an ore is located. The prospecting stage generally involves mapping, geophysical survey techniques (aerial and/or ground-based surveys), geochemical sampling, and preliminary drilling.
After a deposit is discovered, exploration is conducted to define its extent and value via further mapping and sampling techniques such as targeted diamond drilling to intersect the potential ore body. This exploration stage determines ore grade, tonnage, and if the deposit is a viable economic resource.
A feasibility study then considers the theoretical implications of the potential mining operation in order to determine if it should move ahead with development. This includes evaluating the economically recoverable portion of the deposit, marketability and payability of the ore concentrates, engineering, milling and infrastructure costs, finance and equity requirements, potential environmental impacts, political implications, and a cradle to grave analysis from the initial excavation all the way through to reclamation. Multiple experts from differing fields must then approve the study before the project can move on to the next stage. Depending on the size of the project, a pre-feasibility study is sometimes first performed to decide preliminary potential and if a much costlier full feasibility study is even warranted.
Development begins once an ore body has been confirmed economically viable and involves steps to prepare for its extraction such as building of a mine plant and equipment.
Production can then begin and is the operation of the mine in an active sense. The time a mine is active is dependent on its remaining reserves and profitability. The extraction method used is entirely dependent on the deposit type, geometry, and surrounding geology. Methods can be generally categorized into surface mining such as open pit or strip mining, and underground mining such as block caving, cut and fill, and stoping.
Reclamation, once the mine is no longer operational, makes the land where a mine had been suitable for future use.
With rates of ore discovery in a steady decline since the mid 20th century, it is thought that most surface level, easily accessible sources have been exhausted. This means progressively lower grade deposits must be turned to, and new methods of extraction must be developed.
Hazards
Some ores contain heavy metals, toxins, radioactive isotopes and other potentially negative compounds which may pose a risk to the environment or health. The exact effects an ore and its tailings have is dependent on the minerals present. Tailings of particular concern are those of older mines, as containment and remediation methods in the past were next to non-existent, leading to high levels of leaching into the surrounding environment. Mercury and arsenic are two ore related elements of particular concern. Additional elements found in ore which may have adverse health affects in organisms include iron, lead, uranium, zinc, silicon, titanium, sulfur, nitrogen, platinum, and chromium. Exposure to these elements may result in respiratory and cardiovascular problems and neurological issues. These are of particular danger to aquatic life if dissolved in water. Ores such as those of sulphide minerals may severely increase the acidity of their immediate surroundings and of water, with numerous, long lasting impacts on ecosystems. When water becomes contaminated it may transport these compounds far from the tailings site, greatly increasing the affected range.
Uranium ores and those containing other radioactive elements may pose a significant threat if leaving occurs and isotope concentration increases above background levels. Radiation can have severe, long lasting environmental impacts and cause irreversible damage to living organisms.
History
Metallurgy began with the direct working of native metals such as gold, lead and copper. Placer deposits, for example, would have been the first source of native gold. The first exploited ores were copper oxides such as malachite and azurite, over 7000 years ago at Çatalhöyük. These were the easiest to work, with relatively limited mining and basic requirements for smelting. It is believed they were once much more abundant on the surface than today. After this, copper sulphides would have been turned to as oxide resources depleted and the Bronze Age progressed. Lead production from galena smelting may have been occurring at this time as well.
The smelting of arsenic-copper sulphides would have produced the first bronze alloys. The majority of bronze creation however required tin, and thus the exploitation of cassiterite, the main tin source, began. Some 3000 years ago, the smelting of iron ores began in Mesopotamia. Iron oxide is quite abundant on the surface and forms from a variety of processes.
Until the 18th century gold, copper, lead, iron, silver, tin, arsenic and mercury were the only metals mined and used. In recent decades, Rare Earth Elements have been increasingly exploited for various high-tech applications. This has led to an ever-growing search for REE ore and novel ways of extracting said elements.
Trade
Ores (metals) are traded internationally and comprise a sizeable portion of international trade in raw materials both in value and volume. This is because the worldwide distribution of ores is unequal and dislocated from locations of peak demand and from smelting infrastructure.
Most base metals (copper, lead, zinc, nickel) are traded internationally on the London Metal Exchange, with smaller stockpiles and metals exchanges monitored by the COMEX and NYMEX exchanges in the United States and the Shanghai Futures Exchange in China. The global Chromium market is currently dominated by the United States and China.
Iron ore is traded between customer and producer, though various benchmark prices are set quarterly between the major mining conglomerates and the major consumers, and this sets the stage for smaller participants.
Other, lesser, commodities do not have international clearing houses and benchmark prices, with most prices negotiated between suppliers and customers one-on-one. This generally makes determining the price of ores of this nature opaque and difficult. Such metals include lithium, niobium-tantalum, bismuth, antimony and rare earths. Most of these commodities are also dominated by one or two major suppliers with >60% of the world's reserves. China is currently leading in world production of Rare Earth Elements.
The World Bank reports that China was the top importer of ores and metals in 2005 followed by the US and Japan.
Important ore minerals
For detailed petrographic descriptions of ore minerals see Tables for the Determination of Common Opaque Minerals by Spry and Gedlinske (1987). Below are the major economic ore minerals and their deposits, grouped by primary elements.

Ore concentrate, dressed ore or simply concentrate is the product generally produced by metal ore mines. The raw ore is usually ground finely in various comminution operations and gangue (waste) is removed, thus concentrating the metal component. The concentrate is then transported to various physical or chemical processes called hydrometallurgy, pyrometallurgy smelters, and electrometallurgy where it is used to produce useful metals.
Ore concentrates are classified as a hazardous cargo for shipping by the International Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes (IMSBC) Code, which is part of the SOLAS Convention, due to their tendency under certain conditions, to liquefy, which may affect the stability of the ship due to the free surface effect potentially causing a ship to capsize. Special measures are required by the code in order to safely transport concentrates.
The process of pre-contrating ore is one in which relatively coarse sterile material is discarded to avoid the cost of having it being milled and being discarded later as tailings.

Outdoor cooking is the preparation of food in the outdoors. A significant body of techniques and specialized equipment exists for it, traditionally associated with nomadic cultures such as the Berbers of North Africa, the Arab Bedouins, the Plains Indians, pioneers in North America, and indigenous tribes in South America. These methods have been refined in modern times for use during recreational outdoor pursuits, by campers and backpackers.
Currently, much of the work of maintaining and developing outdoor cooking traditions in Westernized countries is done by the Scouting movement and by wilderness educators such as the National Outdoor Leadership School and Outward Bound, as well as by writers and cooks closely associated with the outdoors community.
Food and recipes
The type of food common in outdoors settings is somewhat different compared to household foods and also differs depending on the type of cooking activity. While someone at a public campground may have easy access to a grocery store and be able to prepare plenty of recipes with fresh meat and vegetables, someone on an extended trip into the backcountry will not be able to carry large amounts of fresh food, due to the extra weight from high water content, and will have to rely heavily on food with low water content, such as dried meats and vegetables, packaged dehydrated camping foods, and starches such as ramen, polenta, and dried potato flakes. Wilderness experts in both categories sometimes make use of locally available wild foods as well, particularly wild vegetables and fruit but also occasionally fresh fish and wild game; however, it is not unusual for camping food, especially backcountry food, to be partially or totally vegetarian.
Camping food is often very high in fat and carbohydrates to provide energy for long hikes, and hikers (much like soldiers) must rely heavily on energy-packed snacks such as trail mix, chocolate, energy bars, and sports drinks. Water can also be at a premium, so important parts of a camper's pantry include chlorine or iodine-based water disinfectants as well as drink mixes to mask the flavor of the chemical treatment.
Recipes are often designed with significant planning and home preparation in mind, with certain ingredients mixed at home and then cooked on the trail; to that end, there are several providers of freeze-dried food, both ingredients and full meals, to the outdoors market, and just-add-water instant meals (including hot cereals, pasta or rice in sauce, and instant soup) from the supermarket are popular as well. Alternatively, some wilderness experts advocate bulk rationing, in which each hiker is given a selection of raw ingredients and prepares a meal from scratch on the trail.
Methods
Most outdoor cooking is dictated by the foods themselves which are to be cooked. The first five discussions below, of direct heat, boiling, frying, grilling, and roasting, will, perhaps, describe the cooking methods employed most often in outdoor cooking. These techniques will require only rudimentary, commonsensical tools. Additional methods described further below may be of interest only to those "foodies" who carry their interests into the outdoors for gourmet meals. These advanced methods may require additional equipment or techniques.
Direct heat
The most traditional method for outdoor cooking (and indeed the oldest form of cooking known to humanity) is using a campfire. Campfires can be used for cooking food by several techniques, the food maybe suspended in the flames or in direct contact with the fuel. The techniques for cooking on a campfire are no different from those used for everyday cooking before the invention of stoves or when stoves were still not available. Individuals who are backpacking in an area that allows the gathering of firewood may decide to cook on a campfire to avoid the need to carry extra equipment; however, most campfire cooking is done outside of wilderness areas. Cooking food using a campfire can be tricky for those not accustomed to it; also, due to the risk of fire damage, campfires are illegal in many areas, so many campers prefer to use a portable stove instead.
Boiling
In backpacking particularly, boiling water is the most common kitchen operation undertaken on the trail, used for cooking or reconstituting food, making hot beverages, cleaning up, and even sanitizing drinking water. Portable stoves are therefore generally rated in terms of how quickly they can boil a liter (or another appropriate size) of water; indeed, some commercial stove models are specifically optimized for fast boiling, with other operations such as frying or baking being an afterthought.
Like camp frying pans, camp pots are generally made of very lightweight material (often aluminum or, at a considerable price premium, titanium). Though less of a worry given the thermal mass of water, the camp cook must still take care not to allow food to burn, since the pot itself has very little mass to spread the heat out.
Alternatively, a fireproof container (e.g. mess can, bamboo segment or improvised tree bark pot) is placed (or hung) above the fire.
Roasting
Possibly the simplest method of cooking over a campfire and one of the most common is to roast food on long skewers that can be held above the flames. This is popular for cooking hot dogs or toasting marshmallows for making s'mores. Hungarians often roast slab bacon (Szalonna) over a campfire. Besides skewers and fireplace popcorn poppers, pie irons too may be used (small iron molds with long handles), into which can be placed slices of bread with some form of filling — which are placed over hot coals to cook. When using meat, roasting can have the advantage over grilling in that the grease that drips from the food can be reused. This can be done by placing a fireproof container under the food.
Grilling
Grills are simple to use and food being grilled tends to pick up some flavor from the smoke, although that is not by design as in a Barbecue where the meat is cooked slowly over hours at a significantly lower temperature. Grills over a campfire are used in the same way as an ordinary backyard charcoal grill. If the food is simply placed on the grill, it may catch fire so it requires constant attention. Hand-held grills, aka broilers that clamp over the food may be used for various tasks like warming food, grilling burgers or sausages or making toast. In cases where open fires are not allowed, lightweight charcoal grills (sometimes considered a type of hibachi) are sometimes used for direct grilling of food.
Frying
Frying is not always necessary, but is often used for fish or wild game caught while on the trip, as well as pancakes and certain kinds of bread and desserts made on the trail. As a general rule, the frying medium used in camp cooking is usually either vegetable oil or margarine. Normal (salted) butter may also be appropriate for camp use, but unsalted butter or lard may not be, due to their shorter shelf life.
Camp frying pans often lack handles for easy packing, with the camp cook using a clamp-like device to pick up and move the pan. Camp frying pans are generally made out of very thin metal (though some campers do use cast iron pans for this purpose as well), so extra care must be taken to evenly cook the food, especially over the small-diameter flame of a portable stove. A "round the clock" technique, where the frying pan is moved repeatedly to expose different parts of its base to the flame, is the most commonly recommended solution to the problem, though it is also possible to use a flame diffuser to achieve the same effect. For campfire use, on the other hand, some camp cooks prefer a legged cast-iron pan called a "spider", which is elevated to allow a small fire directly beneath it.
Camp cooks making pancakes in a moderate-size pan often simplify their work and speed up their service by pouring enough batter to make one large, moderate-thickness pancake that takes up the entire pan and then cutting the final product with the spatula to serve individual portions. Also, camp cooks often replicate toast using a frying pan: a bread slice (or more, or a combination of whole and cut portions) is placed in a well-greased pan, pressed down with a spatula, flipped, and pressed down again.
An improvised griddle can be made by putting a flat stone directly on the fire (or above it, on top of other stones). Food is then placed on the stone.
Baking
Putting a baking sheet pan over a furnace can allow for baking, which is in turn derived from the concept of the masonry oven. This was common for centuries, used to make bread, pies, and other items, and is still popular today, particularly among campers who enjoy stuffing their meats. Ovens can be made from cast iron, sheet metal, or aluminum foil-covered cardboard boxes. Reflector ovens are metal containers designed to surround an article of food being baked over an open flame and reflect the heat towards the food.
Dutch ovens and other pots
Closely associated with the American Old West, the Dutch oven of tradition is a heavy cast iron pot, traditionally made with three short legs and a concave cover for holding hot coals on top. While such pots are generally considered too heavy for backpackers, Dutch ovens are often used in group camp-outs and cookouts.
Dutch ovens were traditionally specially designed for camping, and such pots (often with legs and a handle, both for suspending the pot over a fire) are still widely available, though sometimes at a premium over flat-bottomed stove-top models. The oven is placed in a bed of hot coals, often from a keyhole fire with additional coals placed on top of the lid, which in camp ovens usually has a raised rim to keep the coals from falling off. Dutch ovens are made of cast iron or aluminium and are generally not considered suitable for backpacking due to the heavy weight of the pot. Dutch ovens are convenient for cooking dishes that take a long time such as stews, joints of meat, and baked goods. They are not the only option for baking on a campout as devices for baking on portable stoves exist and clay ovens can be constructed at longer encampments.
A pot hanging over the fire, although picturesque, may spill, and the rigging may be difficult to construct from found wood. Generally, this is done with metal rigging, much of it identical to that historically used in home fireplaces before the invention of stoves. Two vertical iron bars with an iron cross-piece allow pots to be hung at various heights or over different temperatures of fire. Griddles, grills, and skewers can also be hung over the fire. When working with wood, one may use two tripods, lashed with tripod lashings, but the rope will be liable to melt or burn. Dovetail joints are more secure but difficult to carve.
A good alternative to cooking with a tripod is to cook directly on the fire itself. To do this properly the fire needs to have a reasonable bed of coals and to have burned down to the point where it is not a roaring fire. While the pot may be set directly upon the coals, this is not preferable since that will tend to extinguish the coals. To lift the pot up off the fire, often two small logs of similar size may be used on either side of the pot; camp-style Dutch ovens have three legs built into the pot to perform this function. An alternative is the use of a metal thread or mesh fire basket. This allows continued airflow through the fire while providing optimal heat. The one downside to this form of cooking is that the pots will become blackened with soot and ash, which can be difficult to scrub off. The ash and soot buildup can be easily avoided by applying a thin layer of dish soap (preferably biodegradable) to the outside of the pot before cooking. The ash and soot will stick to the soap which is then easily rinsed off later.
Steaming
Steaming is possible with plants such as bamboo. In this method, a piece of bamboo is set diagonally above a fire. The bamboo is perforated from within (between the joints) and water is placed in the lowest bamboo segment. Food (e.g. rice) is then placed in the top segment which is steamed due to the water evaporating from the heat in the lowest segment.
Other covered techniques
The original form of covered cooking is the earth oven, simply a covered pit with a fire built in it, demonstrated in techniques such as the Polynesian umu/Hāngī, the Indian tandoori, and the Native American clambake.
Another commonly used technique is the baking of food in aluminum foil packets. Food is wrapped inside a durable packet of tin or aluminum foil, crimped to seal, and placed on or under hot coals. Baked potatoes are commonly cooked this way but entire meals can be cooked in one packet. Besides aluminum or tin, organic material such as leaves (of trees, "Nelumbo nucifera" lotus, "Dendrocalamus lactiferous Munro" bamboo aka Bambusa oldhamii (麻竹葉), phragmites, plantain, taro, etc.), husks (of corn, "Phyllostachys makinoi" bamboo (桂竹籜), etc.), and skins of fruit (citrus, etc.) are also frequently employed. Tree leaves such as those from the banana tree do not burn/ignite as they contain enough oil to resist the heat from the flames (at least until the frying is complete). The way to adapt recipes where food is wrapped in foil is to use a barrier such as baking or silicone paper between the food and the foil; the overall technique is similar to the en papillote technique developed in French cuisine but uses a more robust container.
Other simple methods include clay wrapping food (such as in the kleftiko method used in Greek cuisine), leaf wrapping, and plank grilling, where food is cooked on a wooden plank set above the fire. Hot-stone cooking, where food is placed on a heated stone next to or even in the fire, or where fire-heated stones are dropped into a pot are other methods.
Long-distance truckers, automotive travelers, and rally racers have occasionally resorted to cooking on accessible sections of the vehicle engine; the book Manifold Destiny, though written to a certain extent as a humor book, is considered the authoritative reference on the subject. The food is usually wrapped in several layers of aluminum foil and secured onto the engine block or other hot parts of the engine.
In some areas where there is a significant amount of steady, less-hazardous volcanic activity, lava cooking (invented in Hawaii) is sometimes practiced as a novelty. The food does not come in direct contact with the molten rock, instead being wrapped in a moist barrier (usually wet tropical leaves such as banana foliage or ti leaves). The wrapper is sacrificial, and is chipped or otherwise cleaned off along with the cooled lava before serving.
Backwoods cooking, without utensils
Backwood cooking is a method of cooking without the use of kitchen implements. It commonly takes place in the backwoods, often in combination with wild or conventional camping. Some variants of backwoods cooking allow the use of items of cookware such as a cooking pot; however there are many recipes without any. Some backwoods alternatives to cookware include aluminium foil, fruit skins, and heated stones. Traditionally backwoods cooking takes place over a wood-burning fire because wood is the most available fuel source in the backwoods. As a result, some recipes include information about the intensity of the fire to be used.
Backwoods cooking is widely practiced within the Scouting movement. While it is most associated with scouting today, the term "backwoods cooking" pre-dates Scouting by at least 25 years. Within scouting it may also be known as "lightweight cooking," which may also have a focus on using aluminum foil for cookware for much lighter-weight cooking.
Scouts around the world take part in different backwoods cooking competitions. These competitions are often local in scope, group or district competitions, but some are held by national scout associations; such as that held by the Scout Association of Malta.
Specialist equipment
Portable stoves are widely used in areas where fuel such as wood is scarce or there is a significant fire or environmental hazard to building a campfire. Such devices usually use liquid fuel (usually a petroleum derivative or some kind of alcohol), but gaseous fuels like propane, butane and solid fuels such as wood shavings and hexamine are also used depending on the stove design; while two-burner models are commonly used for front-country camp stoves and function much like residential gas stoves, backpacking stoves generally put out a much more concentrated and less powerful flame and require lightweight cooking equipment ("billycans") made of aluminum or titanium rather than more typical kitchen-type utensils.
In addition, there are often special techniques for baked goods made on the trail in the absence of specialized camp oven equipment, including flipping over the (lidded) pan while on the heat and the "twiggy fire", which mimics the use of charcoal on the lid of a Dutch oven using a small campfire on the lid of the pan.
Reflector ovens are placed on the ground next to the fire, and gather thermal radiation from it.
Solar cookers are a type of equipment that is powered by the sun, and no other fuel is required, creating a positive environmental impact. There are large variations of design and functionality, where the parabolic solar cookers offer the highest temperature, often more than 750 degrees F. SolSource solar stove is an example of a high-temperature solar stove.
Ceramic grills come in many guises and have been around in simple format since ancient times. Many modern cookers sport ornate designs that can be quite beautiful. These grills cook well and efficiently because they retain heat and seal in moisture. Most quality grills are weatherproof and can be used year-round to grill, BBQ, smoke, and bake. Other benefits include fast heating time and a lack of hot spots. They are fuel-efficient, using a minimum of charcoal, and may be safer for children due to the lack of hot spots.
Cooking rigs
Dangers
Outdoor cooking elements can be dangerous due to their high flammability and proximity to occupants. Use of highly flammable alcohols to refuel portable cookers, gas cookers need to be checked for leaks and kept well away from heat and tents in a sheltered and stable setting. Most modern tents are made of lightweight synthetic materials that are not fire retardant. Fires and flames must be properly extinguished and not left unattended. Wind can carry hot embers, possibly igniting wildfires. In rare occasions, portable camping canisters have been known to explode. These can be caused by leaks or overheating around the compressed canister. Adequate air ventilation can prevent overheating during use. It is recommended to operate such portable cooking instruments in the open, despite the pull of luxury in having them operate inside a tent. Several incidents involving camping and cooking fires have resulted in fatalities and severe injuries.
Special precautions are required for camping in the bear country because cooking activities and food storage attract these potentially dangerous animals. Food preparation and storage must be located a safe distance from sleeping areas, so a fire near the camp cannot be used for cooking. Food may need to be stored in bear cans or bear bags hung from a tree or post. Other animals may be attracted to food too; most notably raccoons, squirrels, skunks, and mice.

The PERC Standard for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves (the "PERC Reporting Standard") sets out the minimum standards, as well as additional guidelines and recommendations for the public reporting of exploration results, mineral resources and mineral reserves within Europe.
It applies to all solid mineral raw materials for which public reporting of exploration results, mineral resources and mineral reserves is required by any relevant regulatory authority.
The PERC Reporting Standard is fully aligned with the CRIRSCO International Reporting Template.
The CRIRSCO International Reporting Template is a document that represents the best of the CRIRSCO-style codes for the public reporting of exploration results, mineral resources and mineral reserves that are recognised and adopted world-wide for market-related reporting and financial investment.
The CRIRSCO Template family of reporting codes and standards is complementary to the United Nations Framework Classification for Resources (UNFC) which was initially developed in 1997 to support the development of mineral inventories by government organisations but has since been expanded to cover a range of other sectors. The CRIRSCO Template has been endorsed by the UNECE's Expert Group on Resource Management as a UNFC Aligned System for use in classifying estimates for minerals projects. Details of the relationship between the two systems are provided in the CRIRSCO Template to UNFC Bridging Document] which was originally published in 2015 and since updated in 2024 to reference the 2019 versions of both systems (UNECE, 2024). Additional guidance for users of the bridging document is provided in an accompanying guidance note ( CRIRSCO and UNECE, 2024).
History
During the 1960s, it was realised that minerals reporting was not being undertaken in the best interests of the investors. The Australasian 'Joint Ore Reserves Committee – JORC was formed in 1971 because of concerns about the increase in unacceptable reporting practices (e.g., the Poseidon bubble). The JORC Code was first published in 1989, with the guidelines published in 1990.
During the 1990s, it became clear that the evaluation of mineral deposits should be based on an internationally recognised code of reporting to improve the security of investments in this economic sector (e.g., the Bre-X case).
In 1994, a global representative body, now the 'Combined Reserves International Reporting Standards Committee' – CRIRSCO, was formed to create a set of standard international definitions for reporting mineral resources and mineral/ore reserves, modelled on the JORC Code.
In 1997, the participating countries of CRIRSCO – Australia, Canada, South Africa, USA and the UK reached an agreement on these definitions and presented a document defining the two main categories, Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves, and their associated subcategories (Measured, Indicated and Inferred Mineral Resources and Proved and Probable Mineral Reserves).
In 2001, the first new standard based on these definitions, 'The Reporting Code', was published. It set out minimum standards, recommendations, and guidelines for public reporting of mineral exploration results, mineral resources, and mineral reserves in the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Europe.
With the publication of the updated CRIRSCO Template in 2006, it was recognised that an update to 'The Reporting Code' would be needed. A new committee was formed, with a Europe-wide remit: the 'Pan-European Reserves & Resources Reporting Committee' – PERC.
The first Pan European Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Reserves ('The PERC Reporting Code') was published in 2008.
Since that time, CRIRSCO has continued to introduce improvements and modifications to its reporting template, allowing all CRIRSCO members to use identical wording for key definitions, such as resources and reserves, public reports, competence criteria, and feasibility/pre-feasibility reports.
PERC renamed the PERC Reporting Code (2008 edition) to the PERC Reporting Standard with the 2013 revision. A subsequent revision to the PERC Reporting Standard was undertaken in 2017, and a further revision was published in late 2021.
A detailed account of the historical development of the PERC Reporting Standard can be found on the PERC website.
Application of the PERC Standard
The Standard is applicable to all solid mineral raw materials for which public reporting of exploration results, mineral resources and mineral reserves is required by the relevant regulatory authorities. Solid raw materials include (but are not limited to):
diamonds and other gemstones;
metalliferous minerals and
industrial minerals;
decorative and ornamental stones (dimension stones);
cement feed materials and construction raw materials;
other mineral raw materials; and,
coal.
The Standard is binding on the individual members of the Participating Organisations. These rules are subject to national laws and regulations and to laws and regulations of the EU and EFTA member states, the UK and other European countries as and when appropriate.
Public reports and the PERC Standard
Companies are encouraged to provide information in their public reports, which is as comprehensive as possible. A company's economic interest in the project must be declared. Previously reported information does not need to be repeated in new reports but the earlier published information must be clearly referred to, and must be available on the company website or in other easily accessible form.
The Standard also applies to the following reports if they have been prepared for the purpose of public reporting, or if they include, exploration results, mineral resources estimates, or mineral reserves estimates:
environmental statements;
information memoranda;
expert reports; and
technical papers referring to exploration results, mineral resources or mineral reserves
Reporting terminology
Public reports must use the categories shown in the Figure below when reporting on exploration results, mineral resources and mineral reserves:
The exact definitions of key terms like 'Modifying Factors', 'Inferred'-, 'Indicated'- and 'Measured Mineral Resources' as well as 'Probable' or 'Proved Mineral Reserves' are documented in the PERC Reporting Standard.
PERC Committee
The Pan-European Reserves & Resources Reporting Committee – PERC is the organisation responsible for setting standards for public reporting of exploration results, mineral resources, and mineral reserves by companies listed on European markets.
PERC is formally registered as a legal entity (a not-for-profit organisation) in Brussels, at the office of one of its parent organisations, the European Federation of Geologists.
PERC is a constituent member of the Committee for Mineral Reserves International Reporting Standards – CRIRSCO and is the European equivalent of JORC in Australasia, CIM in Canada, SAMREC in South Africa and similar reserves standards bodies elsewhere. National Instrument 43-101, the legislation which specifies 'Standards of Disclosure' for Mineral Projects within Canada, is broadly comparable to the CRIRSCO reporting codes and standards.
PERC comprises a number of 'Participating Organisations', each of which has a right to nominate members onto the committee. The current member organisations of PERC are:
the European Federation of Geologists (EFG)
the Fennoscandian Association for Metals and Minerals Professionals (FAMMP)
the Geological Society of London (GSL)
the Iberian Mining Engineers Board (IMEB)
the Institute of Geologists of Ireland (IGI)
the Institute of Materials, Minerals, and Mining (IOM3)
Representation on PERC covers major and junior mining sectors, industrial minerals, aggregates, coal, the investment and financial community, and the professional accreditation organisations.
Activities
The principal activities of PERC are:
to manage and update the PERC Reporting Standard;
to represent the European region on CRIRSCO, the international body harmonising reserves reporting standards around the world;
to liaise with ESMA, the London Stock Exchange, AIM, FSA and other stock exchanges and regulators in Europe, to assist them to incorporate into their rules the use of the PERC Reporting Standard in particular and CRIRSCO aligned codes in general;
to promote good practice in the reporting of mineral resources and mineral reserves; and
participation as advisers in national and international minerals statistics and similar projects.

Paper clay (sometimes referred to as fiberclay) is any clay body to which processed cellulose fiber (paper being the most common) has been added.
Properties and techniques
Earthenware, terra cotta, stoneware, porcelain and bone china clay bodies can be made into paper clay. The more fiber added to the clay body, the stronger the unfired dry paper clay, but the weaker the fired body. The less fiber added to the clay body, the weaker the unfired dry paper clay, but the stronger the fired body.
Conventional soft clay building techniques can be used with soft paper clay. This is because there is no physical difference between soft clay and the same clay as a soft paper clay, except the addition of a small percentage of tiny inert cellulose fibers. However, using less fiber in paper clay on the potter's wheel is recommended, particularly if the leather hard work is to be trimmed on the wheel. Paper clay can be made from left over throwing slip from wheel throwing. It is widely used by potters to repair cracks in dry, conventional clay, as well as dry paper clay.
Thinner and taller work can be built with partially dry or completely dry paper clay. Re-wetting paper clay is faster than re-wetting pure clay, as the paper fibres pull water more quickly into the clay body. The damp sections can then be joined. Accelerated drying of paper clay work is possible, and results in less warping and cracking, compared with drying conventional clay. The more fiber in the paper clay, the more rapid the drying with less warping and cracking, and the quicker dry-to-dry joins can be made.
Nonconventional clay techniques are now possible after adding processed cellulose fiber to any clay: First, joining dry-to-dry paper clay and dry-to-soft paper clay are the most radical new techniques. Secondly, metal supports and ceramic material may be used within paper clay, with less cracking than conventional clay.
A new aesthetic has also emerged from combining paper and clay art traditions. For example, dry paper clay is stronger than the same clay without the fiber, so work can be made thinner and more delicate.
Using paper clay requires less technical skill than conventional clay, so beginners can focus more on the creative expression of their ideas. For example, handles of soft paper clay can be added to a completely dry paper clay pot without distorting the form. Other forms built with coils no longer need to be correctly joined before drying, instead, after drying the form, paper clay slip may be applied to join the coils and fill any gaps. Breaks and cracks in both dry and fired paper clay work can be repaired with paper clay slip.
Firing
The firing process for paper clay is similar to the firing of conventional clay. The clay still needs to be completely dry before firing so the change of water into steam does not cause the clay to explode. Maximum firing temperatures, firing schedules and types of glaze to use for paper clay are the same as those used for the specific clay used in the paper clay. Some recommend slightly higher firing temperatures. Because dry paper clay is more porous and has greater tensile strength than dry clay, single glaze firing is possible. Due to its higher dry tensile strength, there are fewer breakages during handling and kiln loading.
Replacing some of the clay with fiber will reduce the thermal mass of clay, in turn reducing further the energy required to fire the work. Changing to paper clay from conventional clay offers considerable energy, financial and time savings when firing ceramics in educational institutions.

The Patton Clay Manufacturing Company was a producer of clay-based products operating in Patton, Pennsylvania, from its incorporation in 1895 until its closure in 1968. Founded by George S. Good, James Kerr, and Alexander Ennis Patton, the company became one of the world's largest manufacturers of clay products, including sewer pipes, tiles, and bricks. Patton Pavers were used globally, contributing to projects such as the construction of the Panama Canal and the paving around the Eiffel Tower.
History
The company's establishment was influenced by the availability of essential resources in the region, such as accessible clay and coal deposits, as well as excellent rail linkages and an ample labor supply. The manufacturing plant spanned approximately 40 acres and was a significant contributor to the local economy, providing employment to over 600 miners and other workers at its peak.
Closure and legacy
After ceasing operations in 1968, the original site of the Patton Clay Manufacturing Company underwent redevelopment. The area now hosts the Patton Plaza, The Meadows Housing Development, and Brickwood Estates. A memorial kiln has been erected on the grounds of The Meadows Housing Development to commemorate the company's historical significance.
Efforts to preserve the legacy of the Patton Clay Manufacturing Company continue. In 2008, a memorial was established at the former factory site by the Patton Pavers group. As of 2024, local residents have initiated efforts to reform the group, aiming to maintain and restore the memorial, as well as to promote community engagement and historical preservation.

Pellets are a processed form of iron ore utilized in the steel industry, specifically designed for direct application in blast furnaces or direct reduction plants. These pellets are spherical in shape, with diameters ranging from 8 to 18 millimeters.
The production of iron ore pellets involves several steps, including grinding the ore, mixing it with binders, and then forming and heating the pellets. The iron content of the pellets generally ranges from 62% to 66%. This enrichment process improves the iron concentration and imparts specific chemical and mechanical properties that enhance the efficiency of steel production.
History
The pelletizing of powdered iron ores was first introduced at the end of the nineteenth century, utilizing tar as a binding agent, comprising 1% by weight. This method involved firing the mixture in a rotating drum to create pellets suitable for blast furnaces, while also facilitating the removal of undesirable elements such as sulfur and arsenic through the emitted fumes.
During this period, pellet sintering developed alongside grate sintering as an alternative process to address the agglomeration challenges faced by high-quality iron ore products. The concept of pellet agglomeration was initially patented by A. Anderson in Sweden in 1912, followed by a similar patent in Germany in 1913. The resultant product was named "GEROELL", derived from the German word for "rolling." Pellets produced through this method demonstrated faster reduction rates compared to calibrated ores and agglomerates made from the same feedstock. In 1926, an industrial pilot plant was constructed by Krupp in Rheinhausen to explore the potential of this pelletizing technology. However, the plant was later dismantled to make way for the installation of a large-scale grate sintering line, which emerged as a competing process in the industry.
Pellet sintering has remained a viable method for processing iron ore. In the United States, this technique was employed to process fine concentrates from the Mesabi Range during World War II. This was necessary as naturally rich iron ores (containing over 50% iron) were being depleted. The development of pelletizing fine magnetite ores, which typically have less than 44 mm in size and are around 85% iron, began around 1943 with support from the University of Minnesota. The process was later adopted in Europe, particularly in Sweden, to facilitate the production of pre-reduced iron ore. Chile opened its first pelletizing facility in 1978 –Planta de Pellets in the port of Huasco– helping iron mining in Chile to remain competitive in face increased ore production in Australia, Brazil and Liberia.
Pellet production saw substantial growth between 1960 and 1980 but eventually plateaued at approximately 300 million tons annually. The following data illustrates pellet production over several years:
In 1984, global pellet production reached 189 million tons, with North America producing 90 million tons, the USSR 63 million tons, and other regions 36 million tons.
By 1992, production had increased to 264 million tons.
In 2008, production further rose to 313 million tons.
However, in 2009, production decreased to 215 million tons due to the economic crisis.
In 2010, production rebounded to 388 million tons.
The internaltional price for iron pellets hoovered around 45 (±10) US dollars cents per dry long ton unit (DLTU) from 1981 to 1997.
Production
Pellets are produced directly at the extraction site by mining companies and are marketed as a distinct product, unlike agglomerates which are typically manufactured at blast furnace sites through the mixing of iron ores from various sources. Pellets are generally more robust and better suited to handling compared to agglomerates, which are relatively fragile. The production process for pellets can vary significantly depending on the local characteristics of the iron ore, and some facilities may include additional stages, such as arsenic removal. The pellet production process involves several key stages:
Crushing: The iron ore is first finely crushed to separate the valuable iron ore from non-valuable gangue materials.
Enrichment: Depending on the ore's characteristics, enrichment is achieved through grinding (which can be conducted in multiple phases and may use either dry or wet methods) and by employing magnetic separation and flotation techniques.
Blending: The ore concentrate may be mixed with additives to achieve the desired chemical composition. Common additives include dolomite, olivine, and quartzite, which typically account for 3 to 3.5% of the pellet's weight.
Binding: To ensure cohesion during the pelletizing process, an additional binder, usually wet bentonite combined with maize flour or polyacrylamide, is added.
These processes ensure that the pellets are produced to meet specific quality standards and can withstand the demands of handling and transportation.
The ore concentrate is formed into pellets through a compaction process. This can be performed using various types of mixing equipment, though saucers are the most commonly employed tool. Before being subjected to sintering, the pellets are referred to as "green" or "raw" pellets, and their typical diameter ranges from 5 to 20 mm.
Following pellet formation, they are either sent to a consumption plant or directed to a cooking oven. Due to their inherent fragility, which persists despite the binder used, pellets are generally more suitable for processing in a cooking oven rather than a consumption plant. After cooking, the pellets are cooled.
The cooking process involves passing the pellets through a chain of contiguous ovens, where they are heated to temperatures of up to 1,200°C. This can be achieved using different methods: a straight grate process for a single, uninterrupted chain or a grate kiln process that includes a rotating cooling tray at the end of the chain. The required heat for this process is supplied by burners, which can either add fuel to the ore concentrate or facilitate the oxidation of the ore, depending on the specific type of ore being processed.
Benefits and limitations
Benefits
Pelletizing ore enhances the efficiency of blast furnaces and direct reduction plants by providing several advantages over raw iron ore:
Handling Resistance: Pellets are more resilient to handling, including in wet conditions, and do not cause clogging in storage hoppers.
Uniform Composition: The consistent and known composition of pellets facilitates a more streamlined process for converting them into iron.
Optimal Porosity: The porosity of pellets enables effective gas-solid chemical reactions within the furnace. This porosity helps maintain the material’s mechanical strength and chemical reactivity, even in the furnace’s highest temperature zones.
Efficient Reduction: The controlled oxidation state of iron oxides in pellets allows carbon monoxide to more effectively reduce Fe2O3 compared to less oxidized compounds like Fe3O4.
Pellets generally contain a higher iron content than agglomerated ore, leading to increased plant productivity and reduced fuel consumption. They are also more durable and capable of withstanding repeated handling. Despite their higher cost—typically about 70% more than raw ore—the benefits they offer in terms of efficiency and performance justify the expense. In steelmaking, pellets are often mixed with sinter in varying proportions to optimize the process.
Similar to sinter, the high-temperature roasting and sintering of pellets effectively eliminate undesirable elements such as sulfur. It is also an efficient method for removing zinc, which can otherwise hinder the operation of blast furnaces. With a vaporization temperature of 907°C, zinc is effectively removed during the roasting process, making pelletizing a suitable method for this application.
Limitations
Pellets are vulnerable to sulfur-induced damage during the reduction process in blast furnaces. Even low levels of sulfur dioxide (SO₂) can interfere with furnace operations, with effects observed at concentrations as low as 5 to 50 parts per million (ppm) in the reduction gas. The detailed mechanism behind this issue was only fully understood towards the end of the 20th century. Initially, sulfur accelerates the extraction of oxygen from the iron oxide, but this effect reverses once metallic iron begins to form, significantly slowing the oxygen extraction process. This unusual behavior is attributed to sulfur's strong affinity for the metallic iron that forms on the pellet surface, which inhibits the penetration of carbon.
Furthermore, the reaction between wustite (FeO) and carbon monoxide (CO) occurs not only on the surface of FeO but also beneath the surface of the reduced iron. Due to iron's superior absorption characteristics, a substantial portion of gas transport happens at the iron/iron oxide phase boundary. This process depends on the iron's ability to absorb sufficient carbon (carburization). If sulfur obstructs carbon absorption, reduction is limited to the surface of the iron oxide. This restriction results in the formation of elongated, fibrous iron crystals, as iron crystallization can only proceed in the direction of the reducing iron oxide. Consequently, the structure of the granules becomes reinforced and can expand to two or three times their original volume. This expansion, or "swelling," of the granules can lead to blockage or significant damage to the blast furnace, highlighting the challenges associated with using pellets in blast furnace operations.
Composition
Pellets, similar to agglomerates, are classified based on their chemical properties as either acidic or basic. To determine the basicity index (ic), the following ratio of mass concentrations is used:
i
c
[
C
a
O
]
+
[
M
g
O
]
[
S
i
O
2
]
+
[
A
l
2
O
3
]
{\displaystyle i_{c}={\frac {[CaO]+[MgO]}{[SiO_{2}]+[Al_{2}O_{3}]}}}
This ratio helps in assessing the relative basicity of the pellets, which is important for optimizing their use in blast furnaces and other metallurgical processes.
In practice, a simplified basicity index (i) is commonly used to classify pellets based on their chemical properties. This index is calculated using the ratio of calcium oxide (CaO) to silicon dioxide (SiO2):
i
CaO
SiO
2
{\displaystyle {\ce {i={\frac {CaO}{SiO2}}}}}
Pellets with an index (i) less than 1 are classified as acidic.
Pellets with an index (i) greater than 1 are categorized as basic.
Pellets with an index (i) equal to 1 are referred to as self-melting.
Pellets can contain high levels of hematite, but the proportion must be controlled. Excessive hematite can weaken the pellet structure during reduction, leading to the pellets breaking down into dust under the weight of stacked charges. This is due to the fact that a high hematite content can cause the pellets to disintegrate, compromising their integrity and usability in the reduction process.
Acid pellets
Acid pellets are produced without the addition of additives, resulting in a specific chemical composition. Typically, the composition of acid pellets is as follows: 2.2% SiO2 and 0.2% CaO. In the United States during the 1990s, the typical characteristics of acid pellets were:
Chemical Composition: 66% Fe, 4.8% SiO2, 0.2% MgO, and a CaO/SiO2 ratio of 0.04.
Compressive Strength: 250 kg.
ISO Reducibility: 1.0.
Swelling Ratio: 16%.
Softening Temperature: 1290°C, with a difference of 230°C between the softening and melting temperatures.
Unlike agglomerated ores, which may include basic fluxes like silicates in the binder during pelletizing, acid pellets maintain their acidic composition due to their solid spherical shape. This design helps preserve their mechanical properties and reduces the risk of disintegration.
Acid pellets exhibit notable mechanical strength with a crush resistance exceeding 250 kg per pellet. However, their reducibility could be improved. Additionally, they are prone to swelling when exposed to lime, especially when the basicity index (i = CaO / SiO2) exceeds 0.25, which may potentially cause issues in a blast furnace.
Self-melting pellets
Self-melting pellets, also known as basic pellets, are a type of iron ore pellet that was developed in the United States in the 1990s. These pellets are designed for use in blast furnaces and are produced by adding lime (calcium oxide) and magnesia (magnesium oxide) to iron ore concentrate, enhancing their metallurgical properties. Self-melting pellets typically have the following properties:
Iron (Fe) content: 63%
Silicon dioxide (SiO2) content: 4.2%
Magnesium oxide (MgO) content: 1.6%
Calcium oxide to silicon dioxide ratio (CaO/SiO2): 1.10
Compressive strength: 240 kg per pellet
ISO reducibility: 1.2
Expansion ratio: 15%
Softening temperature: 1,440°C, with a difference of 80°C between the softening and melting temperatures
These pellets are recognized for their high compressive strength and ease of reduction, making them well-suited for blast furnace operations. The production process of self-melting pellets involves incorporating limestone into the iron ore concentrate. This inclusion affects the productivity of pellet plants due to the calcination process, which involves the endothermic process of limestone. As a result, the overall productivity of the pellet plant can decrease by approximately 10 to 15% compared to the production of acid pellets, which do not include lime. Self-melting pellets are appreciated for their enhanced performance in blast furnaces but require consideration of the trade-offs in production efficiency.
Pellets with low silica content
These pellets are designed for use in direct reduction plants. The typical composition of the pellets includes: 67.8% iron (Fe), 1.7% silicon dioxide (SiO2 ), 0.40% aluminum oxide (Al2O3), 0.50% calcium oxide (CaO), 0.30% magnesium oxide (MgO), and 0.01% phosphorus (P).
Low-silica pellets, when doped with lime, can self-fuse. A typical composition for these self-fusing pellets is: 65.1% iron (Fe), 2.5% silicon dioxide (SiO2), 0.45% aluminum oxide (Al2O3 ), 2.25% calcium oxide (CaO), 1.50% magnesium oxide (MgO), and 0.01% phosphorus (P).
Other types of pellets
To cater to specific customer needs, manufacturers have developed alternative pellet types that offer distinct properties and performance characteristics:
Self-Reducing Pellets: Self-reducing pellets are composed of iron ore and coal, which serve as an internal reducing agent during smelting. This design allows the pellets to undergo reduction without the need for additional reducing materials, enhancing efficiency in certain metallurgical processes.
Magnesian Pellets: Magnesian pellets are created by adding minerals such as olivine or serpentine, which increase the magnesia (MgO) content to approximately 1.5%. These pellets are characterized by their balanced performance in blast furnaces, with an average cold crush resistance of around 180 kg per pellet. The added magnesia helps improve the metallurgical properties of the pellets, making them suitable for specific reduction conditions.
These alternative pellet types are designed to address different operational requirements and enhance the flexibility of iron-making processes.

A phantom forest is an anticipated forest which has failed to survive. The phenomenon is characterized by trees that never emerged or were removed. The trees that make up a phantom forest are called 'phantom trees'. This may seem somewhat odd, because these trees are invisible to the human eye. These trees exist mainly in our expectations regarding the longevity of trees in general, or simply said, these trees exist as lost potential.
The notion is used in a variety of contexts. It may be connected to the effects of climate change or it can be used to describe the failure rate of carbon offsetting schemes. The phantom forest is usually seen a sign of mismanagement, such as greenwashing or intensive deforestation. In case of offsetting schemes, phantom forests are said to also exist 'on paper'.
The notion of 'phantom forest' should not be confused with the notion of 'ghost forest', which refers to an area of deceased trees. However, a ghost forest may eventually become a phantom forest.
Etymology
Although the notion rose to popularity in 2022, the use of 'phantom forest' can be traced back to a few articles that were published in the wake of 2014. One group of authors referred to it as the 'remnants of dry vegetation'. An article by J. Funk appeared for the Union of Concerned Scientists portraying the notion as follows: 'We reached a clearing with a wide-angle view of the phantom forest and distant mountain peaks. Nearby, logging equipment sat at the edge of a recent clear-cut, and we could hear the buzz of chainsaws over the next ridge.' It is implicitly clear in this quote that 'phantom forest' refers to the forest that once was.
Projects
Aimed at planting 1.5 million hectares of forest in the period 2011-2019, the National Greening Program achieved a dismal survival rate of 12% over the first five years, according to the Commission on Audit of the Philippines government.
A 2020 field study conducted by D. Wodehouse on Luzon island revealed an astonishing survival rate of only 2% of mangrove seedlings planted. The other 98% has perished or been swept away.
In 2019 the Turkish government claimed to have planted 11 million trees at 2,000 sites spread across Turkey. Experts estimated that only 5% of the trees had survived.
Sri Lanka's ambitious mangrove planting program, launched to strengthen coastal defenses after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, has yielded disappointing results. A 2017 study conducted by S. Kodikara revealed a survival rate of less than 37%.

Pichangatti is a broad-bladed knife of the Kodavas of Karnataka, India. The characteristic of the pichangatti is its silver hilt with bulbous-shaped pommel in the shape of a parrot's head. The pichangatti features in the traditional male dress of the Kodavas.This is a weapon used only by kodavas
Origin
Pichangatti is derived from a Tamil word for "hand knife". Pichangatti was invented by the Kodavas. The Kodava people are indigenous to the southwestern region of India, which corresponds with the modern state of Karnataka. During the colonial period, the British named the region "Coorgi", a corruption of the Kannada word "kodaga" or "kodagu" meaning "hilly, steep". The word refers to the geographical condition of the region.
The Kodavas were known as tough warriors, establishing many wars against the neighboring nations to protect the sovereignty of their land. When the British Empire intervened the region in 1834, a war broke up between the Kodavas and the British. In 1884, a riot broke out near Malappuram. As a result of this incident, the British punished the Kodavas by seizing their weapons, including the pichangatti. It was recorded that "17,295 weapons of which 7,503 were guns" were confiscated by the British colonial administration. Most of these seized weapons were dumped into the sea, while the high-quality examples can still be seen in what is now the Madras Museum.
Form
Pichangatti has a broad and heavy blade of about 7 inches (18 cm) to 12 inches (30 cm) long. The blade is single-edged, while the hilt ends up in a round bulging base. Pichangatti is heavily decorated, especially on the hilt and on the scabbard. These parts of the pichangatti are usually heavily-decorated in precious metal carvings e.g. brass, silver, gold, or a combination of these; in a very sophisticated design. Probably one of the distinctive features of the pichangatti is the carving of a parrot-head carved on the bulging base of the hilt. An uncut ruby is placed for the parrot's eyes. The hilt is usually inlaid with silver, but they can also be made entirely out of light-colored ivory. A brass or silver chain is attached to the scabbard; the chain carries various utensils e.g. tweezers, nail and ear cleaners, etc.
The scabbard of the pichangatti is made of wood (e.g. ebony) decorated with rich carvings of silver or brass. A silver or brass chain is attached to the scabbard. Attached to the chain are up to five implements used for cleaning and maintenance e.g. a toothpick, tweezers, ear-pick, a piercer, and a nail cleaner. The multi-function of the pichangatti and its small articles made them similar with modern day's pocket knife.
Pichangatti is worn by the Kodavas in front of their waist. They are slipped into the waist-belt together with the ayudha katti.

The Piedmont Charcoal Kilns in Piedmont, Wyoming, are a remnant of a once-extensive charcoal-making industry in southwestern Wyoming. The kilns were built by Moses Byrne around 1869 near the Piedmont Station along the Union Pacific Railroad. The three surviving beehive-shaped kilns were built of local sandstone about 30 feet (9.1 m) in circumference and about 30 feet (9.1 m) high, with 24-inch-thick (61 cm) walls. A granite marker reads: Charcoal Kilns were built by Moses Byrne, 1869, to supply the pioneer smelters in the Utah Valley.
Moses Byrne settled in Piedmont about 1867. A builder, Byrne had built a number of Pony Express stations and stables. Byrne built five kilns at Piedmont in 1869. Most of Byrne's charcoal was shipped to the area around Salt Lake City (the Utah Valley) for use in small smelters and blacksmith shops. Two kilns have since been destroyed. Piedmont itself is a ghost town.
The Piedmont Charcoal Kilns were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1971. They are managed by the state of Wyoming as Piedmont Charcoal Kilns State Historic Site.

Pig iron is an intermediate good used by the iron industry in the production of steel. It is developed by smelting iron ore in a blast furnace. Pig iron has a high carbon content, typically 3.8–4.7%, along with silica and other dross, which makes it brittle and not useful directly as a material except for limited applications.
Etymology
The traditional shape of the molds used for pig iron ingots is a branching structure formed in sand, with many individual ingots at right angles to a central channel or "runner", resembling a litter of piglets being nursed by a sow. When the metal had cooled and hardened, the smaller ingots (the "pigs") were simply broken from the runner (the "sow"), hence the name "pig iron". As pig iron is intended for remelting, the uneven size of the ingots and the inclusion of small amounts of sand are insignificant when compared to the ease of casting and handling.
History
The Chinese were already making pig iron during the later Zhou dynasty (which ended in 256 BC). Furnaces, such as Lapphyttan in Sweden, may date back to the 12th century and some in the County of Mark to the 13th century, which is now part of Westphalia, Germany. It is unclear whether these northern European developments were derived from the Chinese ones or independent inventions. Wagner has postulated a possible link via Persian contacts with China along the Silk Road and Viking contacts with Persia, but there is a chronological gap between the Viking period and Lapphyttan. The step from bloomery to blast furnace is a big technical leap: not only a bigger furnace and more powerful blowers are needed but also higher quality refractory material and a crucible for the molten iron. The temperatures are considerably higher: more than 1538°C (= the melting temp. of iron).
Smelting and producing wrought iron were known in ancient Europe and the Middle East, but it was produced in bloomeries by direct reduction. Small prills of pig iron dispersed in slag are produced in all iron furnaces, but the operator of a bloomery had to avoid conditions causing the phase transition of the iron into liquid in the furnace, as the prill globules or any resulting pig iron are not malleable so can't be hammered in a single piece. Alternatively, decarburizing the pig iron into steel was an extremely tedious process using medieval technology, so in Europe before the Middle Ages the prills were discarded with the slag.
Uses
Traditionally, pig iron was worked into wrought iron in finery forges, later puddling furnaces, and more recently, it is worked into steel. In these processes, pig iron is melted and a strong current of air is directed over it while it is stirred or agitated. This causes the dissolved impurities (such as silicon) to be thoroughly oxidized. An intermediate product of puddling is known as refined pig iron, finers metal, or refined iron.
Pig iron can also be used to produce gray iron. This is achieved by remelting pig iron, often along with substantial quantities of steel and scrap iron, removing undesirable contaminants, adding alloys, and adjusting the carbon content. Ductile iron can also be produced using certain high purity grades of pig iron; depending on the grade of ductile iron being produced, the pig irons chosen may be low in the elements silicon, manganese, sulfur and phosphorus. High purity pig iron is used to dilute any elements in a ductile iron charge which may be harmful to the ductile iron process (except carbon).
Modern uses
Pig iron was historically poured directly out of the bottom of the blast furnace through a channel into a ladle car for transfer to the steel mill in mostly liquid form; in this state, the pig iron was referred to as hot metal. The hot metal was then poured into a steelmaking vessel to produce steel, typically an electric arc furnace, induction furnace or basic oxygen furnace, where the excess carbon is burned off and the alloy composition controlled. Earlier processes for this included the finery forge, the puddling furnace, the Bessemer process, and the open hearth furnace.
Modern steel mills and direct-reduction iron plants transfer the molten iron to a ladle for immediate use in the steel making furnaces or cast it into pigs on a pig-casting machine for reuse or resale. Modern pig casting machines produce stick pigs, which break into smaller 4–10-kilogram (9–22 lb) piglets at discharge.

A pine is any conifer in the genus Pinus () of the family Pinaceae. Pinus is the sole genus in the subfamily Pinoideae. The species are evergreen trees or shrubs with their leaves in bunches, usually of 2 to 5 needles. The seeds are carried on woody cones, with two seeds to each cone scale.
Pines are widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere; they occupy large areas of taiga (boreal forest), but are found in many habitats, including the Mediterranean Basin, and dry tropical forests in southeast Asia and Central America. Some are fire-resistant or fire-dependent.
Pine trees provide one of the most extensively used types of timber. The pine nuts are used to make dishes such as pesto, while retsina wine is flavoured with pine resin.
Description
Tree
Pine trees are evergreen, coniferous resinous trees (or, rarely, shrubs) growing 3–80 metres (10–260 feet) tall, with the majority of species reaching 15–45 m (50–150 ft) tall. The smallest are Siberian dwarf pine and Potosi pinyon, and the tallest is an 83.45 m (273.8 ft) tall sugar pine (Pinus lambertiana) located in Yosemite National Park.
Pines are long lived and typically reach ages of 100–1,000 years, some even more. The longest-lived is the Great Basin bristlecone pine (Pinus longaeva). One individual in the White Mountains of California, dubbed "Methuselah", is among the world's oldest living organisms at around 4,800 years old. An older tree near Wheeler Peak, now cut down, was dated at 4,900 years old.
The spirals of branches, needles, and cone scales are arranged in Fibonacci number ratios.
Bark
The bark of most pines is thick and scaly, but some species have thin, flaky bark. The branches are produced in "pseudo-whorls", actually a very tight spiral but appearing like a ring of branches arising from the same point. Many pines are uninodal, producing just one such whorl of branches each year, from buds at the tip of the year's new shoot, but others are multinodal, producing two or more whorls of branches per year.
Foliage
Pines have four types of leaf:
Seed leaves (cotyledons) on seedlings are borne in a whorl of 4–24.
Juvenile leaves, which follow immediately on seedlings and young plants, are 2–6 centimetres (3⁄4–2+1⁄4 inches) long, single, green or often blue-green, and arranged spirally on the shoot. These are produced for six months to five years, rarely longer.
Scale leaves, similar to bud scales, are small, brown and not photosynthetic, and arranged spirally like the juvenile leaves.
Needles, the adult leaves, are green (photosynthetic) and bundled in clusters called fascicles. The needles can number from one to seven per fascicle, but generally number from two to five. Each fascicle is produced from a small bud on a dwarf shoot in the axil of a scale leaf. These bud scales often remain on the fascicle as a basal sheath. The needles persist for 1.5–40 years, depending on species. If a shoot's growing tip is damaged (e.g. eaten by an animal), the needle fascicles just below the damage generate a stem-producing bud, which can then replace the lost growth tip.
Cones
Pines are monoecious, having the male and female cones on the same tree. The male cones are small, typically 1–5 cm long, and only present for a short period (usually in spring, though autumn in a few pines), falling as soon as they have shed their pollen. The female cones take 1.5–3 years (depending on species) to mature after pollination, with actual fertilisation delayed one year. At maturity, the female cones are 3–60 cm long. Each cone has numerous spirally-arranged scales, with two seeds on each fertile scale; the scales at the base and tip of the cone are small and sterile without seeds.
The seeds (pine nuts) are mostly small and winged, and are anemochorous (wind-dispersed). Some are larger, have only a vestigial wing, and are bird-dispersed. Female cones are woody and sometimes armed to protect developing seeds from foragers. At maturity, the cones usually open to release the seeds. In some of the bird-dispersed species, for example whitebark pine, the seeds are only released by the bird breaking the cones open. In others, the seeds are stored in closed cones for many years until an environmental cue triggers the cones to open, releasing the seeds. This is called serotiny. The most common form of serotiny is pyriscence, in which resin binds the cones shut until the resin is melted by a forest fire, for example in P. radiata and P. muricata. The seeds are then released after the fire, enabling them to colonise the burnt ground with minimal competition from other plants.
Naming
The modern English name "pine" derives from Latin pinus, traced to the Indo-European base *pīt- 'resin'. Before the 19th century, pines were often called firs, a name now applied to another genus, Abies. In some European languages, Germanic cognates of the Old Norse name are still in use for pines, as in Danish fyr and German Föhre.
The genus Pinus was named by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. Pinus sylvestris, the Scots pine, was later chosen as the type species.
Several other conifers are commonly known as pines, such as the Norfolk Island pine (Araucaria heterophylla); however, they belong to other genera.
Evolution
Fossil history
The Pinaceae, the pine family, first appeared in the Jurassic period. The genus Pinus first appeared during the Early Cretaceous; the oldest verified fossil is Pinus yorkshirensis from the Hauterivian-Barremian boundary (~130-125 million years ago) from the Speeton Clay, England. However, there are possible records of the genus from the Jurassic.
External phylogeny
Based on transcriptome analysis, Pinus is most closely related to the genus Cathaya, which in turn is closely related to the genus Picea, the spruces. These genera, with firs and larches, form the pinoid clade of the Pinaceae.
Internal phylogeny
The evolutionary history of the genus Pinus has been complicated by hybridisation. Pines are prone to inter-specific breeding. Wind pollination, long life spans, overlapping generations, large population size, and weak reproductive isolation make breeding across species more likely. As the pines have diversified, gene transfer between different species has created a complex history of genetic relatedness. Research using large genetic datasets has clarified these relationships. Two 21st-century phylogenies are given below; the differences between them demonstrate these complications:
Taxonomy
Pines are gymnosperms. The genus is divided into two subgenera based on the number of fibrovascular bundles in the needle, and the presence or absence of a resin seal on the scales of the mature cones before opening. The subgenera can be distinguished by cone, seed, and leaf characters:
Pinus subg. Pinus, the yellow, or hard pine group, with cones with a resin seal on the scales, and generally with harder wood; the needle fascicles mostly have a persistent sheath (two exceptions, Pinus leiophylla and Pinus lumholtzii, have deciduous sheaths).
Pinus subg. Strobus, syn. Pinus subg. Ducampopinus, the white or soft pine, and pinyon pine groups, with cones without a resin seal on the scales, and usually have softer wood; the needle fascicles mostly have a deciduous sheath (one exception, Pinus nelsonii, has a persistent sheath).
Phylogenetic evidence indicates that the subgenera diverged anciently from one another. Each subgenus is further divided into sections and subsections.
World Flora Online accepts 134 species-rank taxa (119 species and 15 nothospecies) of pines as current, with additional synonyms, and Plants of the World Online 126 species-rank taxa (113 species and 13 nothospecies), making it the largest genus among the conifers. The highest species diversity of pines is found in Mexico.
Distribution
Pines are native to the Northern Hemisphere, with the most species in North America, some in Asia, and a few in Europe. Only two species, Pinus sylvestris and Pinus sibirica, occur in more than one of those regions (Asia and Europe). They occupy large areas of boreal forest (taiga) in latitudes between 50° and 60° N; about a third of this biome is in North America and Scandinavia, the rest in Siberia. The northernmost species is Scots pine, reaching just north of 70° N in Stabbursdalen National Park in Norway. One species, Pinus merkusii, crosses the equator in Sumatra to 2°S. In North America, various species occur in regions at latitudes from as far north as 66° N to as far south as 12°N.
Various species have been introduced to temperate and subtropical regions of both hemispheres, where they are grown as timber or cultivated as ornamental plants in parks and gardens. A number of such introduced species have become naturalised, and species such as Pinus radiata are considered invasive in some regions.
Ecology
Environmental factors
Pines grow in a very large variety of environments, ranging from semi-arid desert to rainforests, from sea level up to 5,200 m (17,100 ft), from the coldest to the hottest environments on Earth. They often occur in mountainous areas with favourable soils.
Pinus contorta is a fire-dependent species, requiring wildfires to maintain healthy populations of diverse ages.
Pinus canariensis is highly fire-resistant, with adaptations such as growing epicormic sprouts after losing its needles in a fire. Some species such as Pinus muricata need fire to open their cones, allowing them to disperse their seeds. Other pines such as Pinus mugo and Pinus yunnanensis can grow at high elevation. Some pines, such as Pinus sabiniana, are adapted to growth in hot, dry semidesert climates.
Species interactions
Pine needles serve as food for the caterpillar larvae of several moth species including the pine beauty, a pest of mature stands of pine trees, and the pine hawk-moth, a large species which causes only occasional damage.
Some moths, notably the pine processionary, whose caterpillars can completely defoliate pine trees, and the pine-tree lappet, are serious pests of commercial forestry.
Several species of pine are attacked by nematodes, causing pine wilt disease, which can quickly kill trees.
The sawfly Diprion pini is likewise a serious commercial pest of pine forestry, especially of Pinus sylvestris. Some birds such as nutcrackers are specialist feeders on pine seeds, and are important in distributing the seeds widely. Crossbills rely on Pinus sylvestris seeds in Scotland, and similarly help significantly to disperse the seeds, whereas red squirrels feed on the seeds but do little for seed dispersal. Pine pollen may contribute to food webs involving detritivores. Nutrients from pollen aid detritivores in development, growth, and maturation, and may enable fungi to decompose plant litter which is low in nutrients. The edible basidiomycete fungus Boletus pinophilus (pine bolete) forms an ectomycorrhizal association with pines such as P. cembra, P. nigra, and P. sylvestris.
Uses
Timber
Pines are among the most commercially important tree species, valued for their timber and wood pulp throughout the world.
In temperate and tropical regions, they are fast-growing softwoods that grow in relatively dense stands. Commercial pines are grown in plantations for timber that is denser and therefore more durable than spruce (Picea). Pine wood is widely used in high-value carpentry items such as furniture, window frames, panelling, floors, and roofing due to its abundance and low cost.
As pine wood has little resistance to insects or decay after logging, in its untreated state it is generally recommended for indoor construction purposes only, such as indoor drywall framing. It is commonly used in Canadian Lumber Standard graded wood. For outside use, pine needs to be treated with copper azole, chromated copper arsenate or other suitable chemical preservatives.
Ornamental uses
Many pine trees make attractive ornamental plantings for parks and larger gardens, while dwarf cultivars are suitable for smaller spaces. There are at least 818 named cultivars (or trinomials) recognised by the American Conifer Society ACS.
Food
The seeds (pine nuts) are generally edible; the young male cones can be cooked and eaten, as can the bark of young twigs. Some species have large pine nuts, which are harvested and sold for cooking and baking. They are an ingredient of pesto alla genovese.
The soft, moist, white inner bark (cambium) beneath the woody outer bark is edible and very high in vitamins A and C. It can be eaten raw in slices as a snack or dried and ground up into a powder for use as an ersatz flour or thickener in stews, soups, and other foods, such as bark bread. The use of pine cambium gave the Adirondack Indians their name, from the Mohawk Indian word atirú:taks, meaning "tree eaters".
A herbal tea is made by steeping young, green pine needles in boiling water (known as tallstrunt in Sweden). In eastern Asia, pine and other conifers are accepted among consumers as a beverage product, and used in teas, as well as wine.
In Greece, the wine retsina is flavoured with resin from Pinus halepensis (Aleppo pine).
Other uses
Turpentine oil, traditionally used as a solvent in paints, resins and varnishes, is extracted from pine resin or pine wood. Pine needles are woven into baskets in Latin America. In traditional Chinese medicine, pine resin is used for burns, wounds and skin complaints. Chinese ink sticks for calligraphy are often made of pine soot, producing a matt black ink when mixed with water. Pine needles have been used by Latvian designer Tamara Orjola to create biodegradable products including paper, furniture, textiles and dyestuffs.
Culture
In ancient Egypt, the god Osiris was honoured with an image placed in a cavity inside a pine tree. In ancient Greece, the goddess Pitthea was linked with pines, while in ancient Rome, the tree was worshipped in the festival of the god Attis and the goddess Cybele. The Greek god of wine, Dionysus (also called Bacchus), was associated with pine as a symbol of fertility, and his devotees carried a stick topped with a pine cone (a thyrsus), a phallic symbol. The Buryat people of Siberia revered groves of Pinus sylvestris, while ancient Celtic Druids marked the midwinter solstice with fires of the same species.
In 1924, the Italian composer Ottorino Respighi completed his tone poem Pines of Rome. Each of its four movements depicts a pine-clad setting in the city of Rome, namely the Villa Borghese gardens, near a catacomb, on the Janiculum Hill, and along the Appian Way.
Pines are often featured in paintings. A 2021 study lists over a hundred works: many are by artists from the Mediterranean region, such as Paul Cézanne and Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot; Northern Europe, such as Akseli Gallen-Kallela and James William Giles; and North America, with works by Tom Thomson and others. The paintings often depict Pinus pinea by the Mediterranean sea; other species include P. sylvestris and P. pinaster. The pine is a particular motif in Chinese art and literature, which sometimes combines painting and poetry in the same work. The pine symbolises longevity and steadfastness, as it retains its green needles throughout the year. Sometimes the pine and cypress are paired. At other times the pine, plum, and bamboo are considered as the "Three Friends of Winter".

Pine tar is a form of wood tar produced by the high temperature carbonization of pine wood in anoxic conditions (dry distillation or destructive distillation). The wood is rapidly decomposed by applying heat and pressure in a closed container; the primary resulting products are charcoal and pine tar.
Pine tar consists primarily of aromatic hydrocarbons, tar acids, and tar bases. Components of tar vary according to the pyrolytic process (e.g. method, duration, temperature) and origin of the wood (e.g. age of pine trees, type of soil, and moisture conditions during tree growth). The choice of wood, design of kiln, burning, and collection of the tar can vary. Pine stumps and roots are used in the traditional production of pine tar.
Pine tar has a long history as a wood preservative, as a wood sealant for maritime use, in roofing construction and maintenance, in soaps, and in the treatment of carbuncles and skin diseases, such as psoriasis, eczema, and rosacea. It is used in baseball to enhance the grip of a hitter's bat; it is also sometimes used by pitchers to improve their grip on the ball, in violation of the rules.
History
Nordic Iron Age
Based on chemical analysis of organic residues, there are strong indications that cone-shaped pits discovered north of Uppsala, Sweden, have been used for pine tar production. Three of the pits have been radiocarbon dated. The oldest dates back to 540–380 BCE, which would make it the world's oldest known, still existing tar production facility. The other dates from 230–390 CE.
Classical antiquity
In his encyclopedic work Natural History (Latin: Naturalis Historia) the Roman naturalist and author Pliny the Elder (23/24–79 CE) describes how, in Europe, tar is produced through the destructive distillation of pine wood. The wood was chopped into small pieces (billets) and heated in a furnace. The tar was used "for coating ships and for many other useful purposes."
17th century
Finland
Pine tar has long been used in Nordic nations as a preservative for wood which may be exposed to harsh conditions, including outdoor furniture and ship decking and rigging. Tar demand surged in the 17th century as European nations began constructing naval and merchant fleets that required tar and pitch for ship waterproofing and caulking. In Finland, then a part of Sweden, large-scale tar production began in the early 17th century. By the late 17th century, tar was Sweden's third most valuable export commodity.
North American colonies
Tar and pitch for maritime use was in such demand that it became an important export for the American colonies, which had extensive pine forests. North Carolinians became known as "Tar Heels."
18th–19th century
Sweden
In present-day Sweden, large-scale tar production started around 1700. Swedish pine tar was often called "Stockholm tar" since, for many years, a single company held a royal monopoly on its export out of Stockholm, Sweden. It was also known as "Archangel Tar". Stockholm tar became synonymous with top-quality tar. Tar production peaked around the mid-1850s and gradually declined thereafter, largely due to new shipbuilding materials reducing the need for tar as a waterproofing agent, and to the decreasing use of hemp rope as sailing ships were phased out.
Chemical composition
32 compounds have been identified in pine tar derived from Pinus nigra , accounting for 95.5% of the total composition. Their respective percentages are:
Methyl dehydroabietate: 22.44%
Dehydroabietic acid: 14.59%
Retene (7-isopropyl-1-methylphenanthrene): 10.08%
Isopimaral: 6.18%
Pimaral: 4.71%
Abietic acid: 4.23%
Pimaric acid: 3.59%
18-Norabieta-8,11,13-triene: 3.50%
2,3,5-Trimethylphenanthrene: 1.72%
Levoglucosan: 1.44%
These compounds primarily consist of resin acids and their derivatives, along with phenanthrene-based hydrocarbons. Such constituents contribute to pine tar's characteristic properties, including its antiseptic and preservative qualities.
Uses
Pine tar was used as a preservative on the bottoms of traditional Nordic-style skis until modern synthetic materials replaced wood in their construction. It also helped waxes adhere, which aided such skis’ grip and glide.
Pine tar is widely used as a veterinary care product, particularly as an antiseptic and hoof care treatment for horses and cattle. It also has been used when chickens start pecking the low hen. Applying a smear of pine tar on the hens' wound acts as a natural germicidal/antibacterial agent that discourages continued attacks on the affected hen due to its foreign texture.
Pine tar is used as a softening solvent in the rubber industry, for treating and fabricating construction materials, and in special paints.
As a preservative and sealant in wooden boats
Pine tar is combined with gum turpentine and boiled linseed oil to preserve and seal the hulls of wooden boats. First, a thin coat is applied to the hull using a mixture with a greater proportion of turpentine. This allows it to permeate deeper into the oakum and fibre of the wood and lets the tar seep into any pinholes and larger gaps that might be in the planks. When applied to the interior of the hull, the tar weeps out to the exterior and indicates where the boat needs the most attention. This is followed with a thicker standard mix. Such treatments, while effective, must be continually reapplied.
Weatherproofing rope
Traditionally, hemp and other natural fibers were the norm for rope production. Such rope would quickly rot when exposed to rain, and was typically tarred to preserve it. The tar would stain the hands of ship's crews, and British Navy seamen became known as "tars."
Baseball
Pine tar is applied to the handles of baseball bats to improve a batter's grip.
Rule 1.10(c) of the 2002 Official rules of Major League Baseball restricts application to the lower 18 inches of a bat. The most famous example of the rule being applied is the Pine Tar Incident, which occurred during the July 24, 1983 game between the Kansas City Royals and New York Yankees which resulted in a George Brett go-ahead home run in the ninth inning being nullified and the game being protested.
Pine tar is also sometimes used illegally by pitchers to improve their grip on the ball in cold weather. This is not allowed due to a regulation prohibiting the application of any foreign substance to a ball (except grip-improving baseball rubbing mud applied by the umpires).
Medical
Pine tar has historically been used for treating skin conditions, usually as an additive in cold process solid soap or lotions. Due to the high presence of phenol in the early manufacturing of pine tar, it was deemed carcinogenic. However, now much of the phenol has been removed. Pine tar was banned by the FDA along with many other ingredients categorized as over the counter drugs, due to a lack of evidence of safety and effectiveness for the specific uses named. However, clinical tests in Australia in 2017 demonstrated that the greatest risk comes from acute sensitivity for those with severe dermatological conditions, and if it comes in contact with the eyes. The number of positive reactions for wood tars was not significantly greater than those for other common allergens. In addition, the concentration of pine tar in topical products available in Australia is up to 2.3%, which is up to four times less than that tested in these studies.
Pine tar has been used to cover peck wounds in captive bird flocks such as chickens, to prevent continued pecking on a wound and cannibalism. Pine tar is also used in veterinary medicine as an expectorant and an antiseptic in chronic skin conditions.
In popular culture
In the television series Ten Pound Poms, depicting immigration from Britain to Australia in the 1950's, a newly betrothed young British man uses pine tar to lighten the skin of his British fiancee's illegitimate mixed-race baby, so that he may pass off the baby as his own (series 2, episode 2).

Plug and feather, also known as plugs and wedges, feather and wedges, wedges and shims, pins and feathers and feather and tare, is a technique and a three-piece tool set used to split stone.
Description
Each set consists of a metal wedge (the plug), and two metal shims (the feathers). The feathers are wide at the bottom, and tapered and curved at the top. When the two feathers are placed on either side of the plug, the combined width of the set is the same at both ends.
Technique
Multiple sets of plug and feathers are typically used to split a single, large piece of stone. The stone is first examined to determine the direction of the grain and to identify any potential defects. After the location of the intended split is chosen, a line is scored on the surface of the stone. A number of holes are then cut or drilled into the stone face along the scored line approximately 10 to 20 centimetres (3.9 to 7.9 in) apart. Plug and feather sets are inserted in the holes, with the "ears" of the feathers facing the direction of the desired split.
The plugs are then struck with a hammer in sequence. An audible tone from the wedges changes to a 'ringing sound' when the wedges are tight. Between each series of strikes, a pause of several minutes allows the stone to react to the pressure. Eventually a crack appears along the line that was scored on the surface and the stone splits apart.
Attempting to split the stone too quickly may cause the stone to "blow out" at the site of the plug or split at an undesirable section. While the stone might be recoverable, it requires additional work.
History
Variations of the plug and feather method have been used since ancient Egyptian times. With this simple mechanical technique, the stone was first measured and marked. Bronze plugs and feathers were then driven into grooves which had been previously cut with a chisel and mallet. This was the most common method used by the Egyptians for quarrying limestone and sandstone. Evidence of this method for cutting obelisks in the quarries of Aswan can clearly be seen. The technique was also used by the Romans.
On Dartmoor, Devon, England, the process is known as feather and tare and it was used from around 1800 to split the large blocks of granite found on the ground there. It was, for instance, used to make the rails for the Haytor Granite Tramway in 1820.
In New England, the plug and feather technique is first mentioned in The New-England Farmer; Or, Georgical Dictionary (1790) by Samuel Deane. Deane wrote: "... another method of breaking rocks, which ought to be generally known, and which sometimes turns out cheaper, is this: Drill two holes in a stone, ranging with the grain, when that can be discovered with the eye. Then filling each hole with two semi-cylindrical pieces of iron, drive a long steel wedge between them. the stone will thus be split open. And commonly, very regular shaped pieces for building may be obtained."
In 1803, Lieutenant Governor Robbins of Massachusetts was a member of a committee that had been tasked with building a new state prison. In a chance encounter during the same year, Robbins came into contact with Mr. Tarbox, who was using a modified version of the plug and feather method that had been described by Deane. Instead of using only two holes, Tarbox drilled as many holes as were necessary, spacing them six to eight inches (15–20 cm) apart. Robbins hired Tarbox to teach his technique to the quarrymen at the quarries in Quincy, Massachusetts. Within a year, the price of quarried stone was cut in half. The method spread quickly and became the basis of the modern plug and feather method still used today.
Circa 1803, according to William Pattee's History of Old Braintree and Quincy (1878) Josiah Bemis, George Stearns, and Michael Wild developed a splitting method similar in concept to the plug and feather method. This technique for splitting stone (referred to by modern researchers as the "Flat Wedge Method") entailed cutting slots in a shallow line into the stone using a cape chisel struck with a large hammer. Small, flat metal wedges were then driven between shims made of sheet iron. The method of feathers and plugs began to be employed around this time, and spread rapidly throughout the region. Evidence of stone split with both methods indicate the evolution of this technique. The method using the cape chisel created long rectangular slots, whereas the newer method, using a plug drill, left round holes.
The plug and feather method is still widely in use today.
Gallery

Post-glacial clay (Swedish: Postglacial lera) is any sedimentary clay layer or deposit that formed after retreating glaciers have abandoned an area. The term is used in Sweden. Compared to glacial clay, post-glacial clay tend to be less rich in calcium carbonate. In some places like around Göta Älv post-glacial clay distinguishes itself by having lower silt content than the glacial clays under it.

Pottery is the process and the products of forming vessels and other objects with clay and other raw materials, which are fired at high temperatures to give them a hard and durable form. The place where a potter makes such wares is also called a pottery (plural potteries). The definition of pottery, used by the ASTM International, is "all fired ceramic wares that contain clay when formed, except technical, structural, and refractory products". End applications include tableware, decorative ware, sanitary ware, and in technology and industry such as electrical insulators and laboratory ware. In art history and archaeology, especially of ancient and prehistoric periods, pottery often means only vessels, and sculpted figurines of the same material are called terracottas.
Pottery is one of the oldest human inventions, originating before the Neolithic period, with ceramic objects such as the Gravettian culture Venus of Dolní Věstonice figurine discovered in the Czech Republic dating back to 29,000–25,000 BC. However, the earliest known pottery vessels were discovered in Jiangxi, China, which date back to 18,000 BC. Other early Neolithic and pre-Neolithic pottery artifacts have been found, in Jōmon Japan (10,500 BC), the Russian Far East (14,000 BC), Sub-Saharan Africa (9,400 BC), South America (9,000s–7,000s BC), and the Middle East (7,000s–6,000s BC).
Pottery is made by forming a clay body into objects of a desired shape and heating them to high temperatures (600–1,400 °C) in a bonfire, pit, or kiln, which induces reactions that lead to permanent changes, including increasing the strength and rigidity of the object. Much pottery is purely utilitarian, but some can also be regarded as ceramic art. An article can be decorated before or after firing.
Pottery is traditionally divided into three types: earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain. All three may be glazed and unglazed. Various techniques may also decorate all. In many examples, the group a piece belongs to is immediately apparent, but this is not always the case; for example, fritware uses little or no clay, so it falls outside these groups. Historic pottery of all these types is often grouped as either "fine" wares, relatively expensive and well-made, and following the aesthetic taste of the culture concerned, or "coarse", "popular", "folk" or "village" wares, mostly undecorated, and often less well-made.
Ceramic vessels have been used for cooking since antiquity due to their excellent thermal retention and even heat distribution. Unlike metal, ceramics emit far-infrared radiation that penetrates food deeply, making them ideal for slow-cooking and stewing. Porous earthenware, like the tagine, absorbs and releases moisture as steam to tenderise ingredients while preserving flavours. Vitrified stoneware provides a dense, non-reactive surface that resists acidic interaction, ensuring taste purity.
Structural integrity under thermal stress is managed by formulating the clay body to lower thermal expansion. This prevents cracking from temperature gradients between heat sources and ambient air. Modern ceramic cookware often employs specialised glazes to resist thermal shock and scratching, providing a durable, hygienic interface for ovens and hobs.
Main types
Earthenware
The earliest forms of pottery were made from clays that were fired at low temperatures, initially in pit-fires or in open bonfires. They were hand-formed and undecorated. Earthenware can be fired as low as 600 °C (1,112 °F), and is normally fired below 1,200 °C (2,190 °F).
Because unglazed earthenware is porous, it has limited utility for storing liquids or as tableware. However, earthenware has had a continuous history from the Neolithic period to today. It can be made from a wide variety of clays, some of which fire to a buff, brown, or black colour, with iron in the constituent minerals resulting in a reddish-brown. Reddish coloured varieties are called terracotta, especially when unglazed or used for sculpture. The development of ceramic glaze made impermeable pottery possible, improving the popularity and practicality of pottery vessels. Decoration has evolved.
Stoneware
Stoneware is pottery that has been fired in a kiln at a relatively high temperature, from about 1,100 °C (2,010 °F) to 1,200 °C (2,190 °F), and is stronger and non-porous to liquids. The Chinese, who developed stoneware very early on, classify this together with porcelain as high-fired wares. In contrast, stoneware could only be produced in Europe from the late Middle Ages, as European kilns were less efficient, and the right type of clay was less common. It remained a speciality of Germany until the Renaissance.
Stoneware is very tough and practical, and much of it has always been utilitarian, for the kitchen or storage rather than the table. But "fine" stoneware has been important in China, Japan, and the West, and continues to be made. Many utilitarian types have also come to be appreciated as art.
Porcelain
Porcelain is made by heating materials, generally including kaolin, in a kiln to temperatures between 1,200 and 1,400 °C (2,200 and 2,600 °F). This is higher than that used for the other types, and achieving these temperatures was a long struggle, as was determining which materials were needed. The toughness, strength, and translucence of porcelain, relative to other types of pottery, arise mainly from vitrification and the formation of the mineral mullite within the body at these high temperatures.
Although porcelain was first made in China, the Chinese traditionally do not recognise it as a distinct category, grouping it with stoneware as "high-fired" ware, opposed to "low-fired" earthenware. This confuses the issue of when it was first made. A degree of translucency and whiteness was achieved by the Tang dynasty (AD 618–906), and considerable quantities were being exported. The modern level of whiteness was not reached until much later, in the 14th century. Porcelain was also made in Korea and in Japan from the end of the 16th century, after suitable kaolin was located in those countries. It was not made effectively outside East Asia until the 18th century.
Archaeology
The study of pottery can help provide insight into past cultures. Fabric analysis (see section below), used to analyse the fabric of pottery, is an important part of archaeology for understanding the archaeological culture of the excavated site by studying the fabric of artifacts, such as their usage, source material composition, decorative pattern, color of patterns, etc. This helps to understand characteristics, sophistication, habits, technology, tools, trade, etc., of the people who made and used the pottery. Carbon dating reveals the age. Sites with similar pottery characteristics share the same culture; those with distinct cultural characteristics but some overlap indicate cultural exchange, such as trade, living in the vicinity, or continuity of habitation. Examples are black and red ware, redware, Sothi-Siswal culture and Painted Grey Ware culture. The six fabrics of Kalibangan are a good example of how fabric analysis can identify a differentiated culture that was previously thought to be typical of Indus Valley civilisation (IVC) culture.
Due to its inherent durability, pottery serves as a primary source of archaeological data, often surviving as diagnostic fragments long after artifacts made of organic materials have decayed. When synthesised with broader archaeological evidence, the analysis of ceramic assemblages is instrumental in constructing theories regarding a society's socioeconomic organisation, economic prosperity, and cultural evolution. Furthermore, ceramic studies allow for significant inferences concerning a culture's daily life, religious practices, and social hierarchies. The decorative and functional choices reflected in pottery can also reveal a society's complex attitudes toward neighbouring groups, its internal worldview, and its conceptualisation of the universe.
It is valuable to examine pottery as an archaeological record of potential interactions between peoples. When pottery is placed within the context of linguistic and migratory patterns, it becomes an even more prevalent category of social artifact. As proposed by Olivier P. Gosselain, it is possible to understand ranges of cross-cultural interaction by looking closely at the chaîne opératoire of ceramic production.
The methods used to produce pottery in early Sub-Saharan Africa fall into three categories: techniques visible (decoration, firing, and post-firing techniques), techniques related to the materials (selection or processing of clay, etc.), and techniques for molding or fashioning the clay. These three categories can be used to consider the implications of the recurrence of a particular sort of pottery in different areas. Generally, the techniques that are easily visible (the first category mentioned above) are readily imitated and may indicate a more distant connection between groups, such as trade in the same market or even relatively close settlements. Techniques that require more studied replication (i.e., the selection of clay and the fashioning of clay) may indicate a closer connection between people, as these methods are usually only transmissible between potters and those otherwise directly involved in production. Such a relationship requires the ability of the involved parties to communicate effectively, implying pre-existing norms of contact or a shared language between the two. Thus, the patterns of technical diffusion in pot-making visible in archaeological findings also reveal patterns of societal interaction.
Chronologies based on pottery are often essential for dating non-literate cultures and helpful for dating historic cultures as well. Trace-element analysis, mostly by neutron activation, allows the sources of clay to be accurately identified, and the thermoluminescence test can be used to provide an estimate of the date of last firing. Examining sherds from prehistory, scientists learned that during high-temperature firing, iron materials in clay record the state of the Earth's magnetic field at that moment.
Fabric analysis
The "clay body" is also called the "paste" or the "fabric", which consists of 2 things, the "clay matrix" – composed of grains of less than 0.02 mm grains which can be seen using the high-powered microscopes or a scanning electron microscope, and the "clay inclusions" – which are larger grains of clay and could be seen with the naked eye or a low-power binocular microscope. For geologists, fabric analysis means the spatial arrangement of minerals in a rock. For Archaeologists, the "fabric analysis" of pottery entails the study of clay matrix and inclusions in the clay body, as well as the firing temperature and conditions. Analysis is done to examine the following 3 in detail:
How pottery was made, e.g., material, design, such as shape and style, etc.
Its decorations, such as patterns, colors of patterns, slipped (glazing), or unslipped decoration
Evidence of the type of use.
The Six fabrics of Kalibangan is a good example of fabric analysis.
Clay bodies and raw materials
Body, or clay body, is the material used to form pottery. Thus, a potter might prepare or order from a supplier such an amount of earthenware, stoneware, or porcelain body. The compositions of clay bodies vary considerably, and include both prepared and 'as dug'; the former being by far the dominant type for studio and industry. The properties also vary considerably, and include plasticity and mechanical strength before firing; the firing temperature needed to mature them; properties after firing, such as permeability, mechanical strength, and colour.
There can be regional variations in the properties of raw materials used for pottery, and these can lead to wares that are unique in character to a locality.
The main ingredient of the body is clay. Some different types used for pottery include:
Kaolin, sometimes referred to as china clay, is a key ingredient in porcelain, which was first used in China around the 7th and 8th centuries.
Ball clay: An extremely plastic, fine grained sedimentary clay, which may contain some organic matter.
Fire clay: A clay having a slightly lower percentage of fluxes than kaolin, but usually quite plastic. It is a highly heat-resistant form of clay that can be combined with other clays to increase the firing temperature and may be used as an ingredient to make stoneware-type bodies.
Stoneware clay: Suitable for creating stoneware. Has many characteristics of both fire clay and ball clay, with a finer grain like ball clay, but is more heat-resistant like fire clay.
Common red clay and shale clay have vegetable and ferric oxide impurities, which make them useful for bricks, but are generally unsatisfactory for pottery except under special conditions of a particular deposit.
Bentonite: An extremely plastic clay which can be added in small quantities to short clay to increase the plasticity.
It is common for clays and other raw materials to be mixed to produce clay bodies suited to specific purposes. Various mineral processing techniques are often utilised before mixing the raw materials, with comminution being effectively universal for non-clay materials.
Examples of non-clay materials include:
Feldspar, act as fluxes which lower the vitrification temperature of bodies.
Quartz plays an important role in attenuating drying shrinkage.
Nepheline syenite, an alternative to feldspar.
Calcined alumina can enhance the fired properties of a body.
Chamotte, also called grog, is fired clay that is crushed, and sometimes then milled. Helps attenuate drying shrinkage.
Bone ash, produced by the calcination of animal bone. A key raw material for bone china.
Frit, produced by quenching and breaking up a glass of a specific composition. It can be used in low additions in some bodies, but common uses include as components of a glaze or enamel, or for the body of fritware, when it is usually mixed with larger quantities of quartz sand.
Various others at low levels of addition such as dolomite, limestone, talc and wollastonite.
Production
The production of pottery includes the following stages:
Preparing the clay body.
Shaping
Drying
Firing
Glazing and decorating. (This can be undertaken before firing. Also, additional firing stages after decoration may be needed.)
Shaping
Before being shaped, clay must be prepared. This may include kneading to ensure an even moisture content throughout the body. Air trapped within the clay body needs to be removed, or de-aired, and can be accomplished either by a machine called a vacuum pug or manually by wedging. Wedging can also help produce an even moisture content. Once a clay body has been kneaded and de-aired or wedged, it is shaped by a variety of techniques, which include:
Hand-building: This is the earliest forming method. Wares can be constructed by hand from coils of clay, combining flat slabs of clay, or pinching solid balls of clay, or some combination of these. Parts of hand-built vessels are often joined with the aid of slip. Some studio potters find hand-building more conducive for one-of-a-kind works of art.
The potter's wheel: In a process called "throwing" (coming from the Old English word thrawan which means to twist or turn) a ball of clay is placed in the centre of a turntable, called the wheel-head, which the potter rotates with a stick, with foot power, or with a variable-speed electric motor. During throwing, the wheel rotates while the solid ball of soft clay is pressed, squeezed, and gently pulled upwards and outwards into a hollow shape. Skill and experience are required to throw pots to an acceptable standard, and while the ware may have high artistic merit, the method's reproducibility is poor. Because of its inherent limitations, throwing can only be used to create wares with radial symmetry on a vertical axis.
Press moulding: a simple technique of shaping by manually pressing a lump of clay body into a porous mould.
Granulate pressing: a highly automated technique of shaping by pressing clay body in a semi-dry and granulated form in a mould. The body is pressed into the mould by a porous die through which water is pumped at high pressure. The fine, free-flowing granulated body is prepared by spray drying a high-solids content slip. Granulate pressing, also known as dust pressing, is widely used in the manufacture of ceramic tiles and, increasingly, of plates.
Jiggering and jolleying: These operations are carried out on the potter's wheel and allow the time taken to bring wares to a standardized form to be reduced. Jiggering is the operation of bringing a shaped tool into contact with the plastic clay of a piece under construction, the piece itself being set on a rotating plaster mould on the wheel. The jigger tool shapes one face while the mould shapes the other. Jiggering is used only in the production of flatware, such as plates, but a similar operation, jolleying, is used in the production of hollowware, such as cups. Jiggering and jolleying have been used in pottery production since at least the 18th century. In large-scale factory production, jiggering and jolleying are usually automated, allowing these operations to be carried out by semi-skilled labour.
Roller-head machine: This machine is for shaping wares on a rotating mould, as in jiggering and jolleying, but with a rotary shaping tool replacing the fixed profile. The rotary shaping tool is a shallow cone with the same diameter as the ware being formed, shaped to the desired form of the back of the article being made. Wares may in this way be shaped, using relatively unskilled labour, in one operation at a rate of about twelve pieces per minute, though this varies with the size of the articles being produced. Developed in the UK just after World War II by the company Service Engineers, the roller-head method was quickly adopted by manufacturers worldwide; it remains the dominant method for producing both flatware and hollowware, such as plates and mugs.
Pressure casting: Is a development of traditional slipcasting. Specially developed polymeric materials allow a mould to be subject to external pressures of up to 4.0 MPa, so much higher than slip casting in plaster moulds, where the capillary forces correspond to a pressure of around 0.1–0.2 MPa. The high pressure leads to much faster casting rates and, hence, faster production cycles. Furthermore, applying high-pressure air through the polymeric moulds upon demoulding the cast enables a new casting cycle to begin immediately in the same mould, unlike plaster moulds, which require lengthy drying times. Polymeric materials have much greater durability than plaster; therefore, it is possible to achieve shaped products with better dimensional tolerances and much longer mould life. Pressure casting was developed in the 1970s for the production of sanitaryware, although, more recently, it has been applied to tableware.
RAM pressing: This is used to shape ware by pressing a bat of prepared clay body into a required shape between two porous moulding plates. After pressing, compressed air is blown through the porous mould plates to release the shaped wares.
Slip casting: This is suited to the making of shapes that other methods cannot form. A liquid slip, made by mixing clay body with water, is poured into a highly absorbent plaster mould. Water from the slip is absorbed into the mould, leaving a layer of clay body that covers its internal surfaces and takes its internal shape. Excess slip is poured out of the mould, which is then split open, and the moulded object removed. Slip casting is widely used in the production of sanitaryware and for making other complex-shaped ware, such as teapots and figurines.
Injection moulding: This is a shape-forming process adapted for the tableware industry from the method long established for the forming of thermoplastic and some metal components. It has been called Porcelain Injection Moulding, or PIM. Suited to the mass production of complex-shaped articles, one significant advantage of the technique is that it allows the production of a cup, including the handle, in a single process, and thereby eliminates the handle-fixing operation and produces a stronger bond between cup and handle. The feed to the mould die is a mix of approximately 50 to 60 per cent unfired body in powder form, together with 40 to 50 per cent organic additives composed of binders, lubricants and plasticisers. The technique is not as widely used as other shaping methods. Injection moulding of ceramic tableware has been developed, though it has yet to be fully commercialised.
3D printing: There are two methods. One involves the layered deposition of soft clay body similar to fused deposition modelling (FDM), and the other uses powder binding techniques where clay body in dry powder form is fused layer upon layer with a liquid.
Drying
Before firing, the water in an article needs to be removed. Several different stages, or conditions of the article, can be identified:
Greenware refers to unfired objects at any stage of dryness, but is most often used to refer to objects ready to be fired.
Plastic is condition of a clay body that has sufficient moisture, around 20%, to be shaped without cracking.
Leather-hard refers to a clay body that has been dried partially. At this stage, the clay object has approximately 15% moisture content. Clay bodies at this stage are very firm and only slightly pliable. Trimming and handle attachment often occur at the leather-hard state.
Bone-dry refers to clay bodies when they reach a moisture content at or near 0%. At that moisture content, the item is ready to be fired. Additionally, the piece is extremely brittle at this stage and must be handled with care.
Chamber dryers are rooms with controlled environments used for the uniform removal of moisture from ceramic ware before firing.. By regulating temperature, humidity, and airflow, chamber dryers prevent the uneven shrinkage and cracking that often plague ambient-air drying. Modern systems often utilise "waste heat" from kilns to increase energy efficiency, maintaining precise "drying curves" tailored to specific clay bodies.. This stage is critical for ensuring structural integrity, as any residual deep-seated moisture can lead to catastrophic steam explosions during the high-heat firing process.
Firing
Firing produces permanent and irreversible chemical and physical changes in the body. It is only after firing that the article or material is pottery. In lower-fired pottery, the changes include sintering, the fusing together of coarser particles in the body at their points of contact with each other. In the case of porcelain, where higher firing temperatures are used, the physical, chemical, and mineralogical properties of the constituents in the body are greatly altered. In all cases, the reason for firing is to harden the wares permanently, and the firing regime must be appropriate to the materials used.
Temperature
As a rough guide, modern earthenwares are normally fired at temperatures in the range of about 1,000–1,200 °C (1,830–2,190 °F); stonewares between about 1,100–1,300 °C (2,010–2,370 °F); and porcelains between about 1,200–1,400 °C (2,190–2,550 °F). Historically, reaching high temperatures was a long-lasting challenge, and earthenware can be fired effectively as low as 600 °C (1,112 °F), achievable in primitive pit firing. The time spent at any particular temperature is also important; the combination of heat and time is known as heatwork.
Kilns can be monitored by pyrometers, thermocouples and pyrometric devices.
Atmosphere
The atmosphere within a kiln during firing can affect the appearance of the body and glaze. Key to this is the differing colours of the various oxides of iron, such as iron(III) oxide (also known as ferric oxide or Fe2O3) which is associated with brown-red colours, whilst iron(II) oxide (also known as ferrous oxide or FeO) is associated with much darker colours, including black. The oxygen concentration in the kiln influences the type, and relative proportions, of these iron oxides in fired the body and glaze: for example, where there is a lack of oxygen during firing the associated carbon monoxide (CO) will readily react with oxygen in Fe2O3 in the raw materials and cause it to be reduced to FeO.
An oxygen-deficient condition, called a reducing atmosphere, is generated by preventing the complete combustion of the kiln fuel; this is achieved by deliberately restricting the air supply or by supplying an excess of fuel.
Methods
Pottery can be fired using a variety of methods, with a kiln being the most common. Both the maximum temperature and the firing duration influence the final characteristics of the ceramic. Thus, the maximum temperature within a kiln is often held constant for a period of time to soak the wares to produce the maturity required in the body of the wares.
Niche techniques include:
In a Western adaptation of traditional Japanese raku ware firing, wares are removed from the kiln while hot and smothered in ashes, paper, or woodchips, which produces a distinctive carbonised appearance. This technique is also used in Malaysia in creating traditional labu sayong.
In Mali, a firing mound is used rather than a brick or stone kiln. Unfired pots are first brought to the place where a mound will be built, customarily by the women and girls of the village. The mound's foundation is made by placing sticks on the ground, then:[...] pots are positioned on and amid the branches, and then grass is piled high to complete the mound. Although the mound contains the pots of many women, who are related through their husbands' extended families, each woman is responsible for her own or her immediate family's pots within the mound.When a mound is completed, and the ground around has been swept clean of residual combustible material, a senior potter lights the fire. A handful of grass is lit, and the woman runs around the circumference of the mound, touching the burning torch to the dried grass. Some mounds are still being constructed, as others are already burning.
Fuel
Kilns may be heated by burning combustible materials, such as wood, coal and gas, or by electricity. The use of microwave energy has been investigated. The use of hydrogen as a fuel for the firing of whiteware ceramics reached a significant milestone in early 2025 with the successful deployment of large-scale pilot kilns utilising 100% hydrogen, building upon feasibility trials that began in late 2019 to decarbonize the production process.
Sustainable firing repurposes organic waste such as animal dung, rice chaff and more unusual fuels such as dried seaweed, olive stones and nut shells. These traditional materials provide localised energy sources, and may create unique surface effects from specific vapours. Modern equivalents include filtered Waste Vegetable Oil and Biodiesel, which offer cleaner-burning liquid alternatives. Similarly, compressed Biomass Pellets provide automated consistency while Biogas from anaerobic digestion replaces fossil-based methane. Feasibility studies have demonstrated that these waste-derived fuels are technically viable for industrial whiteware production.
When used as fuels, coal and wood can introduce smoke, soot and ash into the kiln, which can affect the appearance of unprotected wares. For this reason, wares fired in wood- or coal-fired kilns are often placed in saggars, ceramic boxes, to protect them. Modern kilns fuelled by gas or electricity are cleaner and more easily controlled than older wood- or coal-fired kilns and often allow shorter firing times.
Stages
Biscuit (or bisque) refers to the clay after the object is shaped to the desired form and fired in the kiln for the first time, known as "bisque fired" or "biscuit fired". This firing results in both chemical and physical changes to the minerals of the clay body.
Glaze fired is the final stage of some pottery making, or glost fired. A glaze may be applied to the biscuit ware, and the object can be decorated in several ways. After this, the object is "glazed fired", causing the glaze to melt and adhere to it. Depending on the temperature schedule, the glaze firing may also further mature the body as chemical and physical changes continue.
Decorating
Pottery may be decorated in many different ways. Some decoration can be done before or after the firing, and may be undertaken before or after glazing.
Methods
Painting has been used since early prehistoric times, and can be very elaborate. The painting is often applied to pottery that has been fired once and may then be overlaid with a glaze. Many pigments change colour when fired, and the painter must allow for this.
Glaze: Perhaps the most common form of decoration, which also serves as protection to the pottery, by being tougher and keeping liquid from penetrating the pottery. Glaze may be colourless, especially over painting, or coloured and opaque.
Crystalline glaze: characterised by crystalline clusters of various shapes and colours embedded in a more uniform and opaque glaze, produced by the slow cooling of the glost fire.
Carving: Pottery vessels may be decorated by shallow carving of the clay body, typically with a knife or similar instrument used on the wheel. This is common in Chinese porcelain of the classic period.
Burnishing: The surface of pottery wares may be burnished before firing by rubbing with a suitable instrument of wood, steel, or stone to produce a polished finish that survives firing. It is possible to produce very highly polished wares when fine clays are used or when the polishing is carried out on wares that have been partially dried and contain little water, though wares in this condition are extremely fragile and the risk of breakage is high.
Terra Sigillata is an ancient form of decorating ceramics that was first developed in Ancient Greece.
Lithography, also called litho, although the alternative names of transfer print or "decal" are also common. These are used to apply designs to articles. The litho comprises three layers: the colour, or image, layer, which contains the decorative design; the cover coat, a clear protective layer that may incorporate a low-melting glass; and the backing paper on which the design is printed by screen printing or lithography. There are various methods for transferring the design while removing the backing paper, some of which are suited to machine application.
Banding is the application by hand or by machine of a band of colour to the edge of a plate or cup. Also known as "lining", this operation is often carried out on a potter's wheel.
Agateware: named after its resemblance to the mineral agate, is produced by partially blending clays of differing colours. In Japan, the term "neriage" is used, whilst in China, where such things have been made since at least the Tang dynasty, they are called "marbled" wares.
Digital printing: high-resolution inkjet technology has been a recent, significant development Patented in the late 1990s and commercially viable by 2005, it became the tile industry standard by 2012 before extending into ceramic tableware. Using metal-oxide inks, printers replicate textures like marble with photorealistic precision. This non-contact method decorates irregular surfaces without damaging fragile pieces. It minimises waste and enables "on-demand" customisation, ensuring that no two items in a production run are identical.
Pad printing: this indirect offset process, developed in the late 1940s, uses flexible silicone pads to transfer images from etched plates onto 3D objects. The pad conforms to concave or irregular pottery shapes with ease. It remains the industry standard for high-speed branding and opaque line work on mass-produced tableware.
Engobe: a clay slip is used to coat the surface of pottery, usually before firing. Its purpose is often decorative, though it can also be used to mask undesirable features in the clay to which it is applied. The engobe may be applied by painting or by dipping to provide a uniform, smooth coating. Such decoration is characteristic of slipware. For sgraffito decoration, a layer of engobe is scratched through to reveal the underlying clay.
Gold: Decoration with gold is used on some high-quality ware. Different methods exist for its application, including:
Best gold – a suspension of gold powder in essential oils mixed with a flux and a mercury salt extended. A painting technique can apply this. From the kiln, the decoration is dull and requires burnishing to reveal the full colour
Acid Gold – a form of gold decoration developed in the early 1860s at the English factory of Mintons Ltd. The glazed surface is etched with diluted hydrofluoric acid before application of the gold. The process demands great skill and is used for the decoration only of ware of the highest class.
Bright Gold – consists of a solution of gold sulphoresinate together with other metal resonates and a flux. The name derives from the appearance of the decoration immediately after removal from the kiln, as it requires no burnishing
Mussel Gold – an old method of gold decoration. It was made by rubbing together gold leaf, sugar, and salt, followed by washing to remove solubles
Underglaze decoration is applied, by several techniques, onto ware before it is glazed; an example is blue and white wares. Several techniques can be applied.
In-glaze decoration is applied on the surface of the glaze before the glost firing.
On-glaze decoration is applied on top of the already fired, glazed surface, and then fixed in a second firing at a relatively low temperature.
Glazing
Glaze is a glassy coating on pottery, and reasons to use it include decoration, ensuring the item is impermeable to liquids, and minimizing the adherence of pollutants.
Glaze may be applied by spraying, dipping, trailing, or brushing on an aqueous suspension of the unfired glaze. The colour of a glaze after firing may be significantly different from before firing. To prevent glazed wares sticking to kiln furniture during firing, either a small part of the object being fired (for example, the foot) is left unglazed or special refractory "spurs" are used as supports. These are removed and discarded after the firing.
Some specialised glazing techniques include:
Salt-glazing – common salt is introduced to the kiln during the firing process. The high temperatures cause the salt to volatilise, depositing it on the surface of the ware, where it reacts with the body to form a sodium aluminosilicate glaze. In the 17th and 18th centuries, salt-glazing was used in the manufacture of domestic pottery. Now, except for use by some studio potters, the process is obsolete. The last large-scale application before its demise in the face of environmental clean air restrictions was in the production of salt-glazed sewer-pipes.
Ash glazing – Ash from the combustion of plant matter has been used as the flux component of glazes. The ash generally came from combustion waste from kiln fuelling, although the potential of ash derived from arable crop wastes has been investigated. Ash glazes are of historical interest in the Far East, although there are reports of small-scale use in other locations such as the Catawba Valley Pottery in the United States. They are now limited to a small number of studio potters who value the unpredictability that arises from the raw material's variability.
Health and environmental issues
Although many of the environmental effects of pottery production have existed for millennia, some have been amplified by modern technology and production scales. The principal factors for consideration fall into two categories:
Effects on workers: Notable risks include silicosis, heavy metal poisoning, poor indoor air quality, dangerous sound levels and possible over-illumination.
Effects on the general environment.
Historically, lead poisoning (plumbism) was a significant health concern to those glazing pottery. This was recognised at least as early as the nineteenth century. The first legislation in the UK to limit pottery workers' exposure to lead was included in the Factories Act Extension Act in 1864, with further amendments introduced in 1899.
Silicosis is an occupational lung disease caused by inhaling large amounts of crystalline silica dust, usually over many years. Workers in the ceramic industry can develop it due to exposure to silica dust in the raw materials; colloquially, it has been known as 'Potter's rot'. Less than 10 years after its introduction in 1720 as a raw material for the British ceramics industry, the negative effects of calcined flint on workers' lungs had been noted. In one study reported in 2022, of 106 UK pottery workers, 55 per cent had at least some stage of silicosis. Exposure to siliceous dusts is reduced by either processing and using the source materials as aqueous suspension or as damp solids, or by the use of dust control measures such as local exhaust ventilation. These have been mandated by legislation, such as The Pottery (Health and Welfare) Special Regulations 1950 in the UK. The Health and Safety Executive in the UK has produced guidelines on controlling exposure to respirable crystalline silica in potteries, and the British Ceramics Federation provides a guidance booklet.
Environmental concerns include off-site water pollution, air pollution, disposal of hazardous materials, disposal of rejected ware and fuel consumption.
History
Part of the history of pottery is prehistoric, dating to pre-literate cultures. Therefore, much of this history can only be found among the artifacts of archaeology. Because pottery is so durable, pottery and shards of pottery survive for millennia at archaeological sites and are typically the most common and important artifacts to survive. Many prehistoric cultures are named after the pottery that is the easiest way to identify their sites, and archaeologists have developed the ability to recognise different types from the chemistry of small shards.
Before pottery becomes part of a culture, several conditions must generally be met.
First, there must be usable clay available. Archaeological sites where the earliest pottery was found were near deposits of readily available clay that could be properly shaped and fired. China has large deposits of a variety of clay, which gave it an advantage in the early development of fine pottery. Many countries have large deposits of various clays.
Second, it must be possible to heat the pottery to temperatures that will achieve the transformation from raw clay to ceramic. Methods to reliably create fires hot enough to fire pottery did not develop until late in the development of cultures.
Third, the potter must have time available to prepare, shape, and fire the clay into pottery. Even after control of fire was achieved, humans did not seem to develop pottery until a sedentary life was achieved. It has been hypothesized that pottery was developed only after humans established agriculture, which led to permanent settlements. However, the oldest known pottery is from the Czech Republic and dates to 28,000 BC, at the height of the most recent ice age, long before the beginnings of agriculture.
Fourth, there must be a sufficient need for pottery to justify the resources required for its production.
Early pottery
Methods of forming: Hand-shaping was the earliest method used to form vessels. This included the combination of pinching and coiling.
Firing: The earliest method for firing pottery wares was the use of bonfires pit-fired pottery. Firing times might be short, but the peak temperatures achieved in the fire could be high, perhaps in the region of 900 °C (1,650 °F), and were reached very quickly.
Clay: Early potters used whatever clay was available to them in their geographic vicinity. However, the lowest-quality common red clay was adequate for low-temperature fires used to make the earliest pots. Clay tempered with sand, grit, crushed shell, or crushed pottery was often used to make bonfire-fired ceramics because it provided an open-body texture that allowed water and the clay's volatile components to escape freely. The coarser particles in the clay also acted to restrain shrinkage during drying, thereby reducing the risk of cracking.
Form: In the main, early bonfire-fired wares were made with rounded bottoms to avoid sharp angles that might be susceptible to cracking.
Glazing: the earliest pots were not glazed.
The potter's wheel was invented in Europe in the 5th millennium BC, and revolutionised pottery production. The earliest potter's wheel dates to the middle of the 5th millennium BC from the Cucuteni–Trypillia culture in western Ukraine.
Moulds were used to a limited extent as early as the 5th and 6th century BC by the Etruscans and more extensively by the Romans.
Slipcasting, a popular method for shaping irregularly shaped articles. It was first practised, to a limited extent, in China as early as the Tang dynasty.
Transition to kilns: The earliest intentionally constructed were pit-kilns or trench-kilns, holes dug in the ground and covered with fuel. Holes in the ground provided insulation and improved control over firing.
Kilns: Pit fire methods were adequate for simple earthenware, but other pottery types needed more sophisticated kilns.
History by region
Beginnings of pottery
Pottery may well have been discovered independently in various places, probably by accidentally creating it at the bottom of fires on a clay soil. The earliest known ceramic objects are Gravettian figurines, such as those discovered at Dolní Věstonice in the modern-day Czech Republic. The Venus of Dolní Věstonice is a Venus figurine, a statuette of a nude female figure dated to 29,000–25,000 BC (Gravettian industry). But there is no evidence of pottery vessels from this period. Weights for looms or fishing nets are a very common use for the earliest pottery. Sherds have been found in China and Japan from a period between 12,000 and perhaps as long as 18,000 years ago. As of 2012, the earliest pottery vessels found anywhere in the world, dating to 20,000 to 19,000 years before the present, was found at Xianren Cave in the Jiangxi province of China.
Other early pottery vessels include those excavated from the Yuchanyan Cave in southern China, dated from 16,000 BC, and those found in the Amur River basin in the Russian Far East, dated from 14,000 BC.
The Odai Yamamoto I site, belonging to the Jōmon period, currently has the oldest pottery in Japan. Excavations in 1998 uncovered earthenware fragments which have been dated as early as 14,500 BC.
The term "Jōmon" means "cord-marked" in Japanese. This refers to the markings made on the vessels and figures using sticks with cords during their production. Recent research has elucidated how Jōmon pottery was used by its creators.
It appears that pottery was independently developed in Sub-Saharan Africa during the 10th millennium BC, with findings dating to at least 9,400 BC from central Mali, and in South America during the 9,000s–7,000s BC. The Malian finds date to the same period as similar finds from East Asia – the triangle between Siberia, China and Japan – and are associated in both regions to the same climatic changes (at the end of the ice age new grassland develops, enabling hunter-gatherers to expand their habitat), met independently by both cultures with similar developments: the creation of pottery for the storage of wild cereals (pearl millet), and that of small arrowheads for hunting small game typical of grassland. Alternatively, the creation of pottery in the case of the Incipient Jōmon civilisation could be due to the intensive exploitation of freshwater and marine organisms by late glacial foragers, who started developing ceramic containers for their catch.
East Asia
In Japan, the Jōmon period is known for the development of Jōmon pottery, characterized by rope impressions on the surface, created by pressing rope into the clay before firing. Glazed stoneware was being created as early as the 15th century BC in China. A form of Chinese porcelain became a significant Chinese export from the Tang dynasty (AD 618–906) onwards. Korean potters adopted porcelain as early as the 14th century AD. The ceramic industry has developed greatly since the Goryeo dynasty, and Goryeo ware, a celadon with unique inlaying techniques, was produced. Later, as white porcelain became more common and celadon declined in popularity, they created distinctive ceramics such as Buncheong. Japan's white porcelain was influenced by potters kidnapped during the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598), known as the Ceramic Wars, and by Japanese engineers, who introduced it during the Fall of the Ming dynasty. Typically, Korean potters who settled in Arita pass on pottery techniques. Shonzui Goradoyu-go brought back the secret of its manufacture from the Chinese kilns at Jingdezhen.
In contrast to Europe, the Chinese social elite used pottery extensively at the table, for religious purposes, and for decoration, and the standards of fine pottery were very high. From the Song dynasty (960–1279) for several centuries, the tastes of Chinese elites favoured plain-coloured and exquisitely formed pieces; during this period, porcelain was perfected in Ding ware, although it was the only one of the Five Great Kilns of the Song period to use it. The traditional Chinese category of high-fired wares includes stoneware types such as Ru ware, Longquan celadon, and Guan ware. Painted wares such as Cizhou ware had a lower status, though they were acceptable for making pillows.
The arrival of Chinese blue and white porcelain was probably a result of the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1271–1368) dispersing artists and artisans throughout its vast empire. Both the cobalt stains used for the blue colour, and the style of painted decoration, usually based on plant shapes, were initially borrowed from the Islamic world, which the Mongols had also conquered. At the same time, Jingdezhen porcelain, produced in Imperial factories, took the undisputed leading role in production. The new, elaborately painted style was now favoured at court, and gradually more colours were added.
The secret of making such porcelain was sought in the Islamic world and later in Europe when examples were imported from the East. Many attempts were made to imitate it in Italy and France. However, it was not produced outside of East Asia until 1709 in Germany.
South Asia
Cord-Impressed style pottery belongs to the "Mesolithic" ceramic tradition that developed among Vindhya hunter-gatherers in Central India during the Mesolithic period. This ceramic style is also found in later Proto-Neolithic phase in nearby regions. This early type of pottery, also found at the site of Lahuradewa, is currently the oldest known pottery tradition in South Asia, dating back to 7,000–6,000 BC. Wheel-made pottery began to be made during the Mehrgarh Period II (5,500–4,800 BC) and Merhgarh Period III (4,800–3,500 BC), known as the ceramic Neolithic and Chalcolithic. Pottery, including items known as the ed-Dur vessels, originated in regions of the Saraswati River / Indus River and has been found in some sites in the Indus Civilization.
Despite an extensive prehistoric record of pottery, including painted wares, little "fine" or luxury pottery was made in the subcontinent in historic times. Hinduism discourages eating off pottery, which probably largely accounts for this. Most traditional Indian pottery vessels are large pots or jars for storage, or small cups or lamps, occasionally treated as disposable. In contrast, there are long traditions of terracotta sculpted figures, often rather large; this continues with the Bankura horses in Panchmura, West Bengal.
Southeast Asia
Pottery in Southeast Asia is as diverse as its ethnic groups. Each ethnic group has its own set of standards for pottery. Potteries are made for various purposes, such as trade, food and beverage storage, kitchen use, religious ceremonies, and burial.
West Asia
Around 8000 BC, during the Pre-pottery Neolithic period, and before the invention of pottery, several early settlements became experts in crafting beautiful and highly sophisticated containers from stone, using materials such as alabaster or granite, and employing sand to shape and polish. Artisans used the material's veins to maximum visual effect. Such objects have been found in abundance on the upper Euphrates river, in what is today eastern Syria, especially at the site of Bouqras.
The earliest history of pottery production in the Fertile Crescent starts with the Pottery Neolithic. It can be divided into four periods, namely: the Hassuna period (7000–6500 BC), the Halaf period (6500–5500 BC), the Ubaid period (5500–4000 BC), and the Uruk period (4000–3100 BC). By about 5000 BC, pottery-making was becoming widespread across the region and spreading to neighbouring areas.
Pottery making began in the 7th millennium BC. The earliest forms, found at the Hassuna site, were hand-formed from slabs into undecorated, unglazed, low-fired pots made from reddish-brown clays. Within the next millennium, wares were decorated with elaborate painted designs and natural forms, incising and burnished.
The invention of the potter's wheel in Mesopotamia sometime between 6,000 and 4,000 BC (Ubaid period) revolutionised pottery production. Newer kiln designs could fire wares to 1,050 °C (1,920 °F) to 1,200 °C (2,190 °F), enabling greater possibilities. Small groups of potters now carried out production for small cities, rather than individuals making wares for a family. The shapes and uses of ceramics and pottery expanded beyond simple vessels for storing and carrying to include specialized cooking utensils, pot stands, and rat traps. As the region developed new organizations and political forms, pottery became more elaborate and varied. Some wares were made using moulds, allowing for increased production to meet the needs of growing populations. Glazing was commonly used, and pottery was more decorated.
In the Chalcolithic period in Mesopotamia, Halafian pottery achieved a level of technical competence and sophistication, not seen until the later developments of Greek pottery with Corinthian and Attic ware.
Europe
Europe's oldest pottery, dating from circa 6700 BC, was found on the banks of the Samara River in the middle Volga region of Russia. These sites are known as the Yelshanka culture.
The early inhabitants of Europe developed pottery in the Linear Pottery culture slightly later than the Near East, circa 5500–4500 BC. In the ancient Western Mediterranean, elaborately painted earthenware reached very high levels of artistic achievement in the Greek world; numerous survivals from tombs remain. Minoan pottery was characterized by complex painted decoration with natural themes. Classical Greek culture began to emerge around 1000 BC, featuring a variety of well-crafted pottery that now included the human form as a decorative motif. The pottery wheel was now in regular use. Although glazing was known to these potters, it was not widely used. Instead, a more porous clay slip was used for decoration. A wide range of shapes for different uses developed early and remained essentially unchanged during Greek history.
Fine Etruscan pottery was heavily influenced by Greek pottery and often imported Greek potters and painters. Ancient Roman pottery made much less use of painting but relied on moulded decoration, enabling industrial-scale production. Much of the so-called red Samian ware of the Early Roman Empire was produced in modern Germany and France, where entrepreneurs established large potteries. Excavations at Augusta Raurica, near Basel, Switzerland, have revealed a pottery production site in use from the 1st to the 4th century AD.
Pottery was hardly seen on the tables of elites from Hellenistic times until the Renaissance, and most medieval wares were coarse and utilitarian, as the elites ate off metal vessels. Painted Hispano-Moresque ware from Spain, developing the styles of Al-Andalus, became a luxury for late medieval elites, and was adapted in Italy into maiolica in the Italian Renaissance. Both of these were faience or tin-glazed earthenware, and fine faience continued to be made until around 1800 in various countries, especially France, with Nevers faience and several other centres. In the 17th century, imports of Chinese export porcelain and its Japanese equivalent raised the market
expectations of fine pottery, and European manufacturers eventually learned to make porcelain, often in the form of soft-paste porcelain. From the 18th century onward, European porcelain and other wares from many producers became extremely popular, reducing Asian imports.
United Kingdom
The city of Stoke-on-Trent is widely known as "The Potteries" because of the large number of pottery factories or, colloquially, "Pot Banks". It was one of the first industrial cities of the modern era, where, as early as 1785, 200 pottery manufacturers employed 20,000 workers. Josiah Wedgwood (1730–1795) was the dominant leader.
In North Staffordshire, hundreds of companies produced all kinds of pottery, from tablewares and decorative pieces to industrial items. The main pottery types of earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain were all made in large quantities. The Staffordshire industry was a major innovator in developing new varieties of ceramic bodies, such as bone china and jasperware, and in pioneering transfer printing and other glazing and decorating techniques. In general, Staffordshire was strongest in the middle and lower price ranges, though it also produced the finest and most expensive wares.
By the late 18th century, North Staffordshire was the largest producer of ceramics in the UK, despite significant hubs elsewhere. Large export markets took Staffordshire pottery around the world, especially in the 19th century. Production had begun to decline in the late 19th century, as other countries developed their industries, and declined notably after World War II. Employment fell from 45,000 in 1975 to 23,000 in 1991 and to 13,000 in 2002.
Arabic pottery
Early Islamic pottery followed the forms of the regions which the Arabs conquered. Eventually, however, there was cross-fertilization between the regions. This was most notable in the Chinese influences on Islamic pottery. Trade between China and the Islamic world occurred through a network of trading posts along the lengthy Silk Road. Middle Eastern nations imported stoneware and later porcelain from China. China imported the minerals for Cobalt blue from the Islamic-ruled Persia to decorate their blue and white porcelain, which they then exported to the Islamic world.
Likewise, Arabic art contributed to a lasting pottery form identified as Hispano-Moresque in Andalucia. Unique Islamic forms were also developed, including fritware, lusterware, and specialized glazes such as tin-glazing, which led to the emergence of the popular maiolica.
One major emphasis in ceramic development in the Muslim world was the use of tile and decorative tilework.
Americas
Most evidence points to an independent development of pottery in Native American cultures, with the earliest known dates in Brazil ranging from 9,500 to 5,000 years ago and from 7,000 to 6,000 years ago. Further north in Mesoamerica, dates begin with the Archaic Era (3500–2000 BC), and into the Formative period (2000 BC – AD 200). These cultures did not develop the stoneware, porcelain, or glazes found in the Old World. Maya ceramics include finely painted vessels, usually beakers, with elaborate scenes with several figures and texts. Several cultures, beginning with the Olmec, made terracotta sculpture, and sculptural pieces depicting humans or animals that also serve as vessels are produced in many places, with Moche portrait vessels among the finest.
Africa
The oldest pottery in the world outside of East Asia can be found in Africa. In 2007, Swiss archaeologists discovered pieces of some of the oldest pottery in Africa at Ounjougou in the central region of Mali, dating to at least 9,400 BC. Excavations in the Bosumpra Cave on the Kwahu Plateau in southeastern Ghana, have revealed well-manufactured pottery using a variety of surface decoration techniques dating from the early tenth millennium cal. BC. Following the emergence of pottery traditions in the Ounjougou region of Mali around 11,900 BP and in the Bosumpra region of Ghana soon after, ceramics later arrived in the Iho Eleru region of Nigeria. In later periods, a relationship of the introduction of pot-making in some parts of Sub-Saharan Africa with the spread of Bantu languages has been long recognized, although the details remain controversial and awaiting further research, and no consensus has been reached.
Use of pottery was then found in the Bir Kiseiba region, with a surplus of pottery shards dated roughly 9,300 BC. Archeological digs around Sub-Saharan Africa have continued to bring more history of ceramic use to light, including pottery shards found in Ravin de la Mouche, which were carbon-dated to roughly 7,500 BC. After 8,000 BC, the prevalence of ceramics in Sub-Saharan Africa surged, becoming a continent-wide phenomenon.
Oceania
Pottery has been found at archaeological sites across the islands of Oceania and is attributed to an ancient culture known as the Lapita. Another form of pottery, called Plainware, is found at sites throughout Oceania. The relationship between Lapita pottery and Plainware is not altogether clear. The need for pottery eventually diminished with the settlement of islands farther east into Polynesia, as people there adapted to cooking with earth ovens.
The Indigenous Australians never developed pottery. After Europeans came to Australia and settled, they found deposits of clay which were analysed by English potters as excellent for making pottery. Less than 20 years later, Europeans arrived in Australia and began making pottery. Since then, ceramic manufacturing, mass-produced pottery, and studio pottery have flourished in Australia.

Princess Sodalite Mine (previously the Princess Sodalite Quarry) is a sodalite quarry and retail shop, located near Bancroft, Ontario. The sodalite deposit was first discovered in 1892.
Nomenclature and history
The mineral deposit was first found by Frank Dawson Adams in 1892. Sodalite from the quarry was displayed at the Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893. The Princess of Wales was given a gift of sodalite from the quarry in 1901 at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York. She liked it so much that she ordered a shipment to decorate Marlborough House, in London, England. Thomas Morrison, the quarry's owner at the time, named the quarry the Princess Sodalite Quarry after her visit. The Quarry name continued through the 20th century until at least 2002.
In 1999, the owners of the quarry donated a sodalite boulder to the Earth Sciences Museum at the University of Waterloo in Ontario.The quarry was owned by Paul Rasmussen and Carl Bosiak, the 8th owners, who sold it to the ninth owner Andy Christie.
Location and geology
The quarry is located four kilometres east of Bancroft, Ontario on Ontario Highway 28. It is on rock with calcite vein-dikes that intruded into nepheline gneiss rock, with nepheline prismatic crystals attached to the walls of the dikes.
The quarry is the only source of sodalite in Ontario, where it was once nominated (but ultimately rejected) to be the official provincial mineral.

A private forest (also private woodland or private wood) is a forest that is not owned by municipal authorities (such as a corporate forest), church authorities or the state (e.g. a state forest or national forest). It can refer to woodland owned by a natural or juridical person or a partnership.It is the forest which is planted, nurtured or conserved in any private land.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, private forests are defined as forests owned by individuals, families, communities, private co-operatives, corporations and other business entities, religious and private educational institutions, pension or investment funds, NGOs, nature conservation associations and other private institutions.
Currently, 22 percent [of the world’s forests] are privately owned.
Globally, the share of publicly owned forests has decreased since 1990 and the area of forest under private ownership has increased.
Categories
In forestry terms, private forest may be divided into various sub-categories. For example, in Germany private forest is categorised by size as follows:
Smallest private forest (Kleinstprivatwald): below 5 hectares
Small private forest (Kleinprivatwald): 5 - 200 hectares
Medium private forest (Mittlerer Privatwald): 200 - 1,000 hectares
Large private forest (Großprivatwald): over 1,000 hectares which only represents about 6 percent of the forest area of the old (West German) federal states. In the former East Germany the Evangelical churches, by contrast, still own over 30,000 hectares of private forest and an important private forestry authority with its own uniform and badges.
Emergence
Private forests arise for a variety of reasons. In Europe:
Large private forest estates arose predominantly because mediatised territorial lordships,(e. g. those of princely families) although stripped of their sovereignty, were allowed to keep almost all of their forest estates.
For example, the forest estate of the House of Thurn and Taxis, the largest forest in Germany owned by a private person with 28,000 hectares (according to a 2012 report; according to their own 2010 report: after a major sale to Adolf Merckle still had 20,000 hectares). In Austria, the almost equally large Mayr-Melnhof estate but success of a middle-class merchant dynasty. The Habsburg estates were forcibly acquired and turned into federal forests.
Middle private forests arose (and still arise) either as a result of the division of large private forests (e. g. through inheritance division or sale), but primarily through the sale of forests
Examples here are the nine federal states of Germany: in 1945-49 in the wake of the land reforms in East Germany, large landowners were stripped of their estates in the Soviet Zone of Occupation and the land was given to refugees and former farmers in a move known as Junkerland in Bauernhand ("princes' land into farmers' hands"). After the fall of the Berlin Wall it was decided, not the give the private forests in East Germany back to their original owners, but with the help of a trust company (Treuhandgesellschaft) to transfer them to new private owners. This resulted in plots of private land between 200 and 1,000 hectares in area.
Small private forests are mostly areas of farm woodland. In the 19th century the hitherto common land was divided up and given to the entitled farmers. In order to ensure a sensible division of the woodland the farmers were not usually given one plot, but several plots of varying soil quality and tillering. In regions where gavelkind applied (South Germany, Austria), the sometimes very small plots were further divided, which led to a fragmentation of the forests and makes management today impossible in places.
Distribution
Of the regions, Oceania, North and Central America and South America have the highest proportions of private forests.
Europe
European Union
In the European Union (EU-28) 42% of the area is covered by forest. 60% of the European forest area is private. The share of private forest area is ranging from 13% in Bulgaria up to 98% in Portugal. Almost all European private forest is small holdings, only 1% of European private forest holdings have units over 50 ha.
Austria
Forest cover approximately 40.000 km² which represent 48% of Austria. 82% of the forest area is in private ownership. Most private forest owner held small forest (under 200 hectare).
Traditionally, private forest owner in Austria were predominantly farmers and forest were used to cover the personal needs of wood products and occasionally to finance larger investments. Due to societal change and the associated urbanization a new group of “remote urban forest owners” have emerged. These are owners of small-scale forest, who predominately have inherited but do not manage or actively cultivate their forest. Meanwhile one third of private forest owners belong to this new group.
Catalonia (North-East Spain)
Around two thirds of total area of Catalonia (32,108 km2) is covered by forests (2,050,000 ha) and 75% of this surface are private forests. Forests ownership is scattered and with a large proportion of small properties (221,779 private states, probably more than 260,000 forest owners). The mean surface of the forest estates of Catalonia is 6.7 ha. Moreover, the 52 % of the forest estates do not exceed 1 ha, even they represent just the 2.8% of the private forest area. Just 4.75 % of the properties have more than 25 ha, although they represent the 67.25% of the global private forests and only 1.2 % of private properties are bigger than 100 ha (represent 41.5% of the total private forest area).
Some forest states are also linked to agriculture activities (actually, decreasing), apart from forest activities. Ownership, traditionally, has been passed from parents to their children. Family heritage is estimated to account for 60% of the transmissions.
There is no any concrete definition of small scale forest owners, the definition depends on many aspects. However, in Catalonia, law defines as minimum forest unit, 25 ha
Germany
Germany has around 11.4 million hectares of woodland of which 48.0 percent is in private ownership. The state of North Rhine-Westphalia has the greatest proportion of private forest (66.8%); Hesse has the lowest proportion (24.5%). In Germany there are just under 2 million private forest owners. The average size of German private woods is 3 hectares. Only 13% of private woods are over 1,000 hectares in area; 50% of the area is made of up small private forests of up to 20 hectares in area and they account for 98% of the owners. The DBU Naturerbe, with around 60,000 ha, is the largest private forest owner in Germany. Of the churches in Germany, around 150,000 ha of forest is divided between 6,500 legal owners (parishes, abbeys, foundations, bishoprics). Even though the churches are mostly corporate bodies, the woodlands they own are considered to be private forests.
including private forest of unknown category
Liechtenstein
In Liechtenstein around 43% or 6,865 hectares of the country is wooded. Of that, 8% is in private hands.
Slovakia
In Slovakia over 45.1% (2.221 million ha) of total area is covered by forests. In 2017, the state owned 769 thousand ha of forest land, or 39.5% of its total area. The state forest enterprises managed 1.01 million ha of forest land, or 52.4% of its total area. The remaining area of forest land was managed by non-state forest enterprises which own and manage private, municipal, community and church forests as well as forests of agricultural cooperatives. In private ownership is 214 thousand ha of forests. According to Forestry code the owner of a forest plot or several fragmented forest plots whose aggregate area within forest unit does not exceed 50 hectares is defined as a small forest owner.
Sweden
Sweden is located in the boreal region and forests cover about half of Sweden’s habitable land area. About 80% of the forest land consists of Scots pine, Norway spruce and birch. The standing volume was estimated to 3.5 billion m3 in 2018, and the annual increment exceeds yearly gross felling, and has done so since the 1950s. In 2018, almost half (48%) of the productive 23.7 million hectare productive forest land was owned by about 330,000 (non-industrial) private forest owners, approximately 24% is owned by private companies, 13% was owned by state companies and the remaining 15% by other private (e.g. foundations) and public owners. The forest land was divided into 234,093 forest holdings, of which 228,350 were owned by private forest owners. Private companies and the state had larger holdings than private forest owners.
In 2012, the average age of private forest owners was 57 years, and 39% of the owners were women. The average holding size for private owners was 34.4 hectares, but 16% of the private owners had forest holdings larger than 100 hectares. Almost a third of the owners, 31%, lived in another municipality than their holdings was located in, and the average distance between the owners place of residence and his/her forest holding increased from 37.1 km in 1990 to 58.3 km in 2010. Although the number of owners living over 90 km from their holding has increased, the median distance of 2.2 km indicates that half of the owners still live within walking distance from their holding.
Switzerland
In Switzerland the forests cover 1.3 million hectare and 30 percentage of the forest area is private. 97% of the 250.000 forest owners are private with an average holding of 1.42 hectare.

Pulpwood can be defined as timber that is ground and processed into a fibrous pulp. It is a versatile natural resource commonly used for paper-making but also made into low-grade wood and used for chips, energy, pellets, and engineered products.
Pulpwood can be derived from most types of trees. Categorizing trees into hardwood and softwood is the easiest way to characterize types of paper produced from pulpwood.
Hardwoods are raw material that are preferred for pulp used in printing papers. It has small dimensions in its fibres, which can be useful for small-scale uniformity, opacity, and surface smoothness, all important for printing paper.
Softwoods are the preferred raw material for strong papers, due to the length and slimness of the fibres. Low-density softwoods, such as firs with thin-walled fibres are preferred for papers with high demands for bonding-related strength characteristics. Some of these characteristics include tensile, burst, and surface strength.
Trees raised specifically for pulp production account for 15% of world pulp production, while old growth forests account for 9% and second/third plus generation forests account for the balance.
Hardwood applications
Hardwood has anatomical structural differences to softwood, which influences physical properties, durability, workability, and bonding. Different types of cells complete the three main tasks in hardwoods compared to softwoods. The main tasks include stabilization, water conduit, and storage.
Hardwood applications can be sectioned into four areas:
Solid wood products
Wood-based materials
Use after modification
Supplemental services
Solid wood products
Hardwoods (such as oak) are the preferred raw material for joists, roof structures and timber frames. The use of solid hardwoods has decreased during the last couple centuries, most likely due to the development of wood-based materials that allow for larger constructions not limited to the size of trees.
Trees of any size can be used for pulpwood, but trees that are 5–9 inches in diameter at breast height are normally used. These trees are cut after a saw timber harvest or as a separate operation to thin a crowded stand. Low-quality stands are completely harvested for pulpwood to regenerate the forest to more desirable species, as well as larger trees with disease or defects that prevent their use for lumber.
Additional fields of application include playgrounds, wood-facings, railway sleepers, bridges, and more. Furniture is another application of hardwood. Furniture made of pure solid wood is relatively rare. Most parts of furniture such as table boards, shelves or cabinet doors belong to wood-based materials because of their glued components. Solid wood can be used for chairs, tables, beds, upholstery frames, sideboards, cabinets, bathtubs, and more.
Hardwood is also used for interior work, such as parquet flooring, doors, and windows. Hardwood is especially preferred for parquet flooring. Tree species in darker colours are commonly used to give the flooring a "used look," for visual appeal. Solid wood is used for front doors and windows, while internal doors are mainly made of wood-based panels.
Wood-based materials
Wood-based materials can be separated into a few different types. These include solid wood, ply, particle, and fibre materials. Solid wood materials are used as beam or panels. Typical tree species used for solid wood materials include beech, oak, birch, alder and chestnut. Hardwoods are commonly used for nonstructural products such as plywood.
Structural products such as cross laminated timber, are mainly composed of softwoods. Particle materials are ideal to use low-rate timber assortments and saw mill waste. Types of particle materials include particle board, mineral-bonded wood composites, oriented strand board, laminated strand lumber, and oriented strand lumber.
Fibre materials include fibreboards, insulating fibreboards, wood particle mouldings and wood plastic composites. The quality and processing of fibreboards and insulating fibreboards are influenced by the fibre percentage, the geometrical structural of the fibre, and the specific chemical composition of wood. The fibres of hardwoods are short, smooth and thin, and are suited for the dry production process because they do not mat. Ironically, hardwoods are barely used for fibreboards and insulating fibreboards.
Use after modification
The purposes of wood modification are dimensional stabilization and resistance increase. Wood can be modified in a multitude of ways, including but not limited to: chemical modification, heat treatment, ammonia treatment, electrodialysis, and more.
Chemical modification, heat treatment, and impregnation (with salts, metals, monomers and polymers) are the most used methods.
Supplemental services
Hardwood can be used in other ways outside of physical wood structures and paper. It can be used as a substance, such as through food production. The sawdust of beech and oak is used to grow edible mushrooms. Oak, beech and maple are used to cure meat or fish, while oak staves, chips and powder add aroma to wine. The sawdust of oak and robinia can be used to filter elements such as copper, nickel, zinc and cadmium. It can also be added to plastics. 60% of linoleum flooring consists of sawdust.
Wood can also be used as an energy source, with sawmill waste and low-rate timber. Combustion, wood gasification, and production of bioethanol are the three main ways hardwood is used for energy.
Combustion: split billets, chips and wood pellets. High-density wood species burn down slower, and the heat value depends on wood moisture content. Burning rate decreases with increasing density.
Wood gasification (synthetic natural gas and biomass to liquid): synthesis gas production is done by wood smouldering.
Bioethanol: start off by the splitting of cellulose and hemicelluloses in sugar by enzymes and acids, then the fermentation of the sugar with the aid of microorganisms. Lastly, the distillation and dewatering creates the bioethanol.
Softwood applications
Softwoods come from gymnosperm trees that consists of needles and cones. When a sample of softwood is observed under a microscope, they appear to have no (visible) pores because of the presence of tracheids. Tracheids are a primitive element of xylem (fluid-conducting tissues). They consist of a single elongated cell and a secondary cellulosic wall containing a thick layer of lignin. Medullary rays and tracheids transport water and produce sap. Approximately 80% of timber comes from softwood, such as cedar trees, Douglas fir, juniper, pine, and many more.
Although they are called 'softwood,' trees, they are not actually softer (in texture) in comparison to hardwood trees. The term just refers to wood that comes from gymnosperms or conifers. Some hardwood trees are even softer than specific softwood tree species.
Softwoods are used in wood manufacturing as well, and are sometimes preferred over hardwoods depending on the product being constructed. An important characteristic that softwoods have that make them a suitable pulpwood to build with, is that they can easily absorb any kind of finish. They can become very resistant and last for a long time (centuries). Softwoods tend to be cheaper than hardwood due to their growth rate and development being faster. They are versatile, strong, and can be managed easily. Some of the biggest softwood forests can be found in Canada, Scandinavia, and Russia.
Types of softwoods
Cedarwood: One of the most resistance and durable softwoods. Cedarwood is originally from the Mediterranean area and is highly resistant to water, bacteria, fungi, and insects. Their impressive resistance ability comes from the woods natural scent, which is sweet and pleasant. Its insect-repellent properties make cedar-wood ideal for the manufacturing of internal furniture, such as chests, boxes, and closets. The woods insulating properties make it suitable to be used for roofing material. Western Red Cedar is used to make musical instruments such as guitars and violins, due to its colour and resistance to warping and cracking.
Pinewood: Mostly found in the Northern Hemisphere, this type of wood is mainly used for domestic applications. It is resistance to shrinkage, swelling, and warping. It is used for outdoor wooden projects, such as decks. A disadvantage of pinewood is that over time, the wood could splinter, and items constructed from the specific type of pinewood used for making outdoor furniture/decks should be checked annually to prevent any risks to the people using them.
Firwood: This type of wood comes from Douglas Fir trees, and can be found in North America, Europe, North Africa, and Asia. It is strong and resistant to abrasion, and can be used for a diverse array of products. Some include furniture, doors, windows, and larger-scale items such as bridge parts, log homes, and commercial buildings. It can also be used for boat-building and aircraft construction, due to its sturdy and stable nature.
Redwood: This is mainly used for outdoor applications because of its resistance to weather conditions, insects, and rot. As a result of these characteristics, it is a premium building wood. It is another type of wood used to build decks, because of its natural strength, stability, and lifespan (can last a long time).
Products
Pulpwood can be used for a multitude of different uses, some of them already mentioned above. Some of the main products it is used for is listed below.
Paper
Paper production is the most common and main use for pulpwood. Paper can be produced from both hardwood and softwood trees, and each species for both types of trees have specific and unique properties that make the type of paper and other products produced differ. The short fibres of hardwoods trees produce smoother and more uniform paper, like printing paper. Softwood trees have longer fibres that produce industrial papers like newsprint.
Wood is broken down mechanically or chemically. After the breakdown process, fibres (composed of two kinds of cellulose) and lignin are leftover. Lignin is the glue or cement that holds the fibres in wood together. Simply putting it, wood pulp is a large amount of individual wood fibres with the lignin removed. Wood pulp is naturally between dark brown to light grey in colour. Dark brown wood pulp is used for paper bags and boxes, and bleaching the pulp produces higher grades of paper (among other products).
Chemical Wood Pulp
The chemical method of breaking down wood pulp to make paper is more commonly used and energy efficient compared to the mechanical method. In the chemical method, the wood chips are 'cooked' in large tanks. The tanks are called digesters, and are like pressure cookers. Chemicals, referred to as 'cooking liquor' help break down wood chips into a mass of fibres. The chemicals used are: 1) sulfite salts with an excess of sulfur dioxide and 2) caustic soda and sodium sulfide (kraft process). The lignin of the wood is made soluble, resulting in fibre separation into whole fibres. Further purification by bleaching can also be done. Purifying the pulp by bleaching and by alkaline extraction is called alpha or dissolving pulp. This type of pulp is used for speciality papers, for rayon and cellulose film production, and for cellulose derivatives (nitrate and acetate.)
Mechanical Pulp
With mechanical pulping, machines are used to grind wood chips into pulp, creating a pulp that retains most of its lignin. Due to the short fibres created by this process, the resulting paper is mostly used for newspapers, phone books, and other low-strength paper. Mechanical pulp can also be referred to as ground-wood pulp, and the grinding process starts by subjecting wood to an abrading action, either by pressing the wood against a revolving grinding stone or by passing chips through a mill.
Pulp grinders are usually powered by electric motors and automatically loaded. Most ground-wood pulp flows directly to an adjacent paper mill for use as stock. It is then formed into a sheet on a cylindrical vacuum filter, then pressed in a hydraulic press to a moisture content of about 50 percent. The pressed sheets result in the formation of bales.
Pellets
Pulpwood also produces wood pellets, which can be used for heating homes and electricity production. They can be formed by the grinding of biomass (in the form of unused tree tops), sawdust, or even entire trees, then compressed into small pellets to be stored, transported, and fed into boilers and furnaces. Softwood species are preferred to make wood pellets due to the resin content required to bind the particles together.
Firewood
Firewood is the oldest use of pulpwood. Poor quality trees are put to better use and burned as a crude energy source as heat, light and cooking fuels. Coppicing refers to the ancient and traditional woodland management technique that involves cutting trees at their base and creating a stool for new shoots to grow. During the Stone Age, coppicing was done to manage forests for the production of firewood fuels.
Biofuel
Biofuels refer to fuels derived from plant materials or manure. They are currently under debate whether they are a safe and environmentally friendly alternative to fossil fuels as a source of energy. The carbon in plants is produced by absorbing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere via photosynthesis, and burning biofuels/plant-derived fuels puts the same amount of CO2 back into the atmosphere.
Generating heat and electricity from wood-fuel is a multi step process.
It starts off by drying the wood, followed by pyrolysis to produce gasses.
Next, the gasses are purified and burnt to generate electricity
The ash created during the pyrolysis process contains nutrients that are used as plant fertilizer, but it could also contain contaminants from the soils of the trees origin site.
Some of the potential sources of wood-fuel include early thinnings from commercial plantations, the residues from timber harvesting and arboricultural activities, coppicing and sawmills.

Pyrolysis (; from Ancient Greek πῦρ (pûr) 'fire' and λύσις (lúsis) 'separation') is a process involving the separation of covalent bonds in organic matter by thermal decomposition within an inert environment without oxygen.
Applications
Pyrolysis is most commonly used in the treatment of organic materials. It is one of the processes involved in the charring of wood. In general, pyrolysis of organic substances produces volatile products and leaves char, a carbon-rich solid residue. Extreme pyrolysis, which leaves mostly carbon as the residue, is called carbonization. Pyrolysis is considered one of the steps in the processes of gasification or combustion. Compared to syngas, pyrolysis gas has a high percentage of heavy tar fractions, which condense at relatively high temperatures, preventing its direct use in gas burners and internal combustion engines.
The process is used heavily in the chemical industry, for example, to produce ethylene, many forms of carbon, and other chemicals from petroleum, coal, and even wood, or to produce coke from coal. It is used also in the conversion of natural gas (primarily methane) into hydrogen gas and solid carbon char, recently introduced on an industrial scale. Aspirational applications of pyrolysis would convert biomass into syngas and biochar, waste plastics back into usable oil, or waste into safely disposable substances.
Terminology
Pyrolysis is one of the various types of chemical degradation processes that occur at higher temperatures (above the boiling point of water or other solvents). It differs from other processes like combustion and hydrolysis in that it usually does not involve the addition of other reagents such as oxygen (O2, in combustion) or water (in hydrolysis). Pyrolysis produces solids (char), condensable liquids (heavy and light oils, and tar), and non-condensable gasses.
Pyrolysis is different from gasification. In the chemical process industry, pyrolysis refers to a partial thermal degradation of carbonaceous materials that takes place in an inert (oxygen free) atmosphere and produces both gases, liquids and solids. The pyrolysis can be extended to full gasification that produces mainly gaseous output, often with the addition of e.g. water steam to gasify residual carbonic solids, see Steam reforming.
Types
Specific types of pyrolysis include:
Carbonization, the complete pyrolysis of organic matter, which usually leaves a solid residue that consists mostly of elemental carbon.
Methane pyrolysis, the direct conversion of methane to hydrogen fuel and separable solid carbon, sometimes using molten metal catalysts.
Hydrous pyrolysis, in the presence of superheated water or steam, producing hydrogen and substantial atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Dry distillation, as in the original production of sulfuric acid from sulfates.
Destructive distillation, as in the manufacture of charcoal, coke and activated carbon.
Charcoal burning, the production of charcoal.
Tar production by destructive distillation of wood in tar kilns.
Caramelization of sugars.
High-temperature cooking processes such as roasting, frying, toasting, and grilling.
Cracking of heavier hydrocarbons into lighter ones, as in oil refining.
Thermal depolymerization, which breaks down plastics and other polymers into monomers and oligomers.
Ceramization involving the formation of polymer derived ceramics from preceramic polymers under an inert atmosphere.
Catagenesis, the natural conversion of buried organic matter to fossil fuels.
Flash vacuum pyrolysis, used in organic synthesis.
Other pyrolysis types come from a different classification that focuses on the pyrolysis operating conditions and heating system used, which have an impact on the yield of the pyrolysis products.
History
Pyrolysis has been used for turning wood into charcoal since ancient times. The ancient Egyptians used the liquid fraction obtained from the pyrolysis of cedar wood in their embalming process.
The dry distillation of wood remained the major source of methanol into the early 20th century. Pyrolysis was instrumental in the discovery of many chemical substances, such as phosphorus from ammonium sodium hydrogen phosphate NH4NaHPO4 in concentrated urine, oxygen from mercuric oxide, and various nitrates.
Wood distillation components
Primary Thermal Decomposition: When resinous woods undergo traditional pyrolysis, distillation forms three physical states:
Gas: Volatile vapors often used for fuel.
Charcoal: The solid carbon residue remaining in the kiln.
Liquid Distillate: The condensed vapors that form the basis for further refinement.
Separation of the Liquid: The liquid distillate naturally separates (or is processed) into two distinct layers:
Pyroligneous Acid: An aqueous (water-based) layer containing acetic acid and methanol.
Crude Tar: A thick, dark, oily mixture that contains the heavier organic compounds.
Fractional Distillation of Crude Tar: The Crude Tar is then further distilled based on density and boiling points to produce:
Light Oils (Turpentine): Oils lighter than water that rise to the top.
Pitch or Tar: The heavy, nearly solid residue left at the bottom.
Heavy Oils (Creosote): These are the "Oils Heavier than Water." This specific fraction is the medical or industrial Creosote, valued for its preservative and antiseptic properties.
General processes and mechanisms
Pyrolysis generally consists of heating the material above its decomposition temperature, breaking chemical bonds in its molecules. The fragments usually become smaller molecules, but may combine to produce residues with larger molecular mass, even amorphous covalent solids.
In many settings, some amounts of oxygen, water, or other substances may be present, so that combustion, hydrolysis, or other chemical processes may occur besides pyrolysis proper. Sometimes those chemicals are added intentionally, as in the burning of firewood, in the traditional manufacture of charcoal, and in the steam cracking of crude oil.
Conversely, the starting material may be heated in a vacuum or in an inert atmosphere to avoid chemical side reactions (such as combustion or hydrolysis). Pyrolysis in a vacuum also lowers the boiling point of the byproducts, improving their recovery.
When organic matter is heated at increasing temperatures in open containers, the following processes generally occur, in successive or overlapping stages:
Below about 100 °C, volatiles, including some water, evaporate. Heat-sensitive substances, such as vitamin C and proteins, may partially change or decompose already at this stage.
At about 100 °C or slightly higher, any remaining water that is merely absorbed in the material is driven off. This process consumes a lot of energy, so the temperature may stop rising until all water has evaporated. Water trapped in crystal structure of hydrates may come off at somewhat higher temperatures.
Some solid substances, like fats, waxes, and sugars, may melt and separate.
Between 100 and 500 °C, many common organic molecules break down. Most sugars start decomposing at 160–180 °C. Cellulose, a major component of wood, paper, & and cotton fabrics, decomposes at about 350 °C. Lignin, another major wood component, starts decomposing at about 350 °C, but continues releasing volatile products up to 500 °C. The decomposition products usually include water, carbon monoxide CO and/or carbon dioxide CO2, as well as a large number of organic compounds. Gases and volatile products leave the sample, and some of them may condense again as smoke. Generally, this process also absorbs energy. Some volatiles may ignite and burn, creating a visible flame. The non-volatile residues typically become richer in carbon and form large disordered molecules, with colors ranging between brown and black. At this point the matter is said to have been "charred" or "carbonized".
At 200–300 °C, if oxygen has not been excluded, the carbonaceous residue may start to burn, in a highly exothermic reaction, often with no or little visible flame. Once carbon combustion starts, the temperature rises spontaneously, turning the residue into a glowing ember and releasing carbon dioxide and/or monoxide. At this stage, some of the nitrogen still remaining in the residue may be oxidized into nitrogen oxides like NO2 and N2O3. Sulfur and other elements like chlorine and arsenic may be oxidized and volatilized at this stage.
Once combustion of the carbonaceous residue is complete, a powdery or solid mineral residue (ash) is often left behind, consisting of inorganic oxidized materials of high melting point. Some of the ash may have left during combustion, entrained by the gases as fly ash or particulate emissions. Metals present in the original matter usually remain in the ash as oxides or carbonates, such as potash. Phosphorus, from materials such as bone, phospholipids, and nucleic acids, usually remains as phosphates.
Safety challenges
Because pyrolysis takes place at high temperatures which exceed the autoignition temperature of the produced gases, an explosion risk exists if oxygen is present. Careful temperature control is needed for pyrolysis systems, which can be accomplished with pyrolysis controller. Pyrolysis also produces various toxic gases, such as carbon monoxide. The greatest risk of fire, explosion, and release of toxic gases comes when the system is starting up and shutting down, operating intermittently, or during operational upsets.
Inert gas purging is essential to manage inherent explosion risks. The procedure is not trivial and failure to keep oxygen out has led to accidents.
Occurrence and uses
Clandestine chemistry
Conversion of CBD to THC can be brought about by pyrolysis.
Cooking
Pyrolysis has many applications in food preparation. Caramelization is the pyrolysis of sugars in food (often after the sugars have been produced by the breakdown of polysaccharides). The food goes brown and changes flavor. The distinctive flavors are used in many dishes; for instance, caramelized onion is used in French onion soup. The temperatures needed for caramelization lie above the boiling point of water. Frying oil can easily rise above the boiling point. Putting a lid on the frying pan keeps the water in, re-condensing some and keeping the temperature too cool to brown.
Pyrolysis of food can also be undesirable, as in the charring of burnt food (at temperatures too low for the oxidative combustion of carbon to produce flames and burn the food to ash).
Coke, carbon, charcoals, and chars
Carbon and carbon-rich materials have desirable properties but are nonvolatile, even at high temperatures. Consequently, pyrolysis is used to produce many kinds of carbon; these can be used for fuel, as reagents in steelmaking (coke), and as structural materials.
Charcoal is a less smoky fuel than pyrolyzed wood. Some cities ban, or used to ban, wood fires; when residents only use charcoal (and similarly treated rock coal, called coke) air pollution is significantly reduced. In cities where people do not generally cook or heat with fires, this is not needed. In the mid-20th century, "smokeless" legislation in Europe required cleaner-burning techniques, such as coke fuel and smoke-burning incinerators as an effective measure to reduce air pollution.
The coke-making or "coking" process consists of heating the material in "coking ovens" to very high temperatures (up to 900 °C or 1,700 °F) so that the molecules are broken down into lighter volatile substances, which leave the vessel, and a porous but hard residue that is mostly carbon and inorganic ash. The amount of volatiles varies with the source material, but is typically 25–30% of it by weight. High temperature pyrolysis is used on an industrial scale to convert coal into coke. This is useful in metallurgy, where the higher temperatures are necessary for many processes, such as steelmaking. Volatile by-products of this process are also often useful, including benzene and pyridine. Coke can also be produced from the solid residue left from petroleum refining.
The original vascular structure of the wood and the pores created by escaping gases combine to produce a light and porous material. By starting with a dense wood-like material, such as nutshells or peach stones, one obtains a form of charcoal with particularly fine pores (and hence a much larger pore surface area), called activated carbon, which is used as an adsorbent for a wide range of chemical substances.
Biochar is the residue of incomplete organic pyrolysis, e.g., from cooking fires. It is a key component of the terra preta soils associated with ancient indigenous communities of the Amazon basin. Terra preta is much sought by local farmers for its superior fertility and capacity to promote and retain an enhanced suite of beneficial microbiota, compared to the typical red soil of the region. Efforts are underway to recreate these soils through biochar, the solid residue of pyrolysis of various materials, mostly organic waste.
Carbon fibers are filaments of carbon that can be used to make very strong yarns and textiles. Carbon fiber items are often produced by spinning and weaving the desired item from fibers of a suitable polymer, and then pyrolyzing the material at a high temperature (from 1,500–3,000 °C or 2,730–5,430 °F). The first carbon fibers were made from rayon, but polyacrylonitrile has become the most common starting material. For their first workable electric lamps, Joseph Wilson Swan and Thomas Edison used carbon filaments made by pyrolysis of cotton yarns and bamboo splinters, respectively.
Pyrolysis is the reaction used to coat a preformed substrate with a layer of pyrolytic carbon. This is typically done in a fluidized bed reactor heated to 1,000–2,000 °C or 1,830–3,630 °F. Pyrolytic carbon coatings are used in many applications, including artificial heart valves.
Liquid and gaseous biofuels
Pyrolysis is the basis of several methods for producing fuel from biomass, i.e. lignocellulosic biomass. Crops studied as biomass feedstock for pyrolysis include native North American prairie grasses such as switchgrass and bred versions of other grasses such as Miscantheus giganteus. Other sources of organic matter as feedstock for pyrolysis include greenwaste, sawdust, waste wood, leaves, vegetables, nut shells, straw, cotton trash, rice hulls, and orange peels. Animal waste including poultry litter, dairy manure, and potentially other manures are also under evaluation. Some industrial byproducts are also suitable feedstock including paper sludge, distillers grain, and sewage sludge.
In the biomass components, the pyrolysis of hemicellulose happens between 210 and 310 °C. The pyrolysis of cellulose starts from 300 to 315 °C and ends at 360–380 °C, with a peak at 342–354 °C. Lignin starts to decompose at about 200 °C and continues until 1000 °C.
Synthetic diesel fuel by pyrolysis of organic materials is not yet economically competitive. Higher efficiency is sometimes achieved by flash pyrolysis, in which finely divided feedstock is quickly heated to between 350 and 500 °C (660 and 930 °F) for less than two seconds.
Syngas is usually produced by pyrolysis.
The low quality of oils produced through pyrolysis can be improved by physical and chemical processes, which might drive up production costs, but may make sense economically as circumstances change.
There is also the possibility of integrating with other processes such as mechanical biological treatment and anaerobic digestion. Fast pyrolysis is also investigated for biomass conversion. Fuel bio-oil can also be produced by hydrous pyrolysis.
Methane pyrolysis for hydrogen
Methane pyrolysis is an industrial process for "turquoise" hydrogen production from methane by removing solid carbon from natural gas. This one-step process produces hydrogen in high volume at low cost (less than steam reforming with carbon sequestration). No greenhouse gas is released. No deep well injection of carbon dioxide is needed. Only water is released when hydrogen is used as the fuel for fuel-cell electric heavy truck transportation,
gas turbine electric power generation, and hydrogen for industrial processes including producing ammonia fertilizer and cement. Methane pyrolysis is the process operating around 1065 °C for producing hydrogen from natural gas that allows removal of carbon easily (solid carbon is a byproduct of the process). The industrial quality solid carbon can then be sold or landfilled and is not released into the atmosphere, avoiding emission of greenhouse gas (GHG) or ground water pollution from a landfill.
In 2015, a company called Monolith Materials built a pilot plant in Redwood City, CA to study scaling Methane Pyrolysis using renewable power in the process. A successful pilot project then led to a larger commercial-scale demonstration plant in Hallam, Nebraska in 2016. As of 2020, this plant is operational and can produce around 14 metric tons of hydrogen per day. In 2021, the US Department of Energy backed Monolith Materials' plans for major expansion with a $1B loan guarantee. The funding will help produce a plant capable of generating 164 metric tons of hydrogen per day by 2024. Pilots with gas utilities and biogas plants are underway with companies like Modern Hydrogen. Volume production is also being evaluated in the BASF "methane pyrolysis at scale" pilot plant, the chemical engineering team at University of California - Santa Barbara and in such research laboratories as Karlsruhe Liquid-metal Laboratory (KALLA). Power for process heat consumed is only one-seventh of the power consumed in the water electrolysis method for producing hydrogen.
The Australian company Hazer Group was founded in 2010 to commercialise technology originally developed at the University of Western Australia. The company was listed on the ASX in December 2015. It is completing a commercial demonstration project to produce renewable hydrogen and graphite from wastewater and iron ore as a process catalyst use technology created by the University of Western Australia (UWA). The Commercial Demonstration Plant project is an Australian first, and expected to produce around 100 tonnes of fuel-grade hydrogen and 380 tonnes of graphite each year starting in 2023. It was scheduled to commence in 2022. "10 December 2021: Hazer Group (ASX: HZR) regret to advise that there has been a delay to the completion of the fabrication of the reactor for the Hazer Commercial Demonstration Project (CDP). This is expected to delay the planned commissioning of the Hazer CDP, with commissioning now expected to occur after our current target date of 1Q 2022." The Hazer Group has collaboration agreements with Engie for a facility in France in May 2023, A Memorandum of Understanding with Chubu Electric & Chiyoda in Japan April 2023 and an agreement with Suncor Energy and FortisBC to develop 2,500 tonnes per Annum Burrard-Hazer Hydrogen Production Plant in Canada April 2022
The American company C-Zero's technology converts natural gas into hydrogen and solid carbon. The hydrogen provides clean, low-cost energy on demand, while the carbon can be permanently sequestered. C-Zero announced in June 2022 that it closed a $34 million financing round led by SK Gas, a subsidiary of South Korea's second-largest conglomerate, the SK Group. SK Gas was joined by two other new investors, Engie New Ventures and Trafigura, one of the world's largest physical commodities trading companies, in addition to participation from existing investors including Breakthrough Energy Ventures, Eni Next, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, and AP Ventures. Funding was for C-Zero's first pilot plant, which was expected to be online in Q1 2023. The plant may be capable of producing up to 400 kg of hydrogen per day from natural gas with no CO2 emissions.
One of the world's largest chemical companies, BASF, has been researching hydrogen pyrolysis for more than 10 years.
Ethylene
Pyrolysis is used to produce ethylene, the chemical compound produced on the largest scale industrially (>110 million tons/year in 2005). In this process, hydrocarbons from petroleum are heated to around 600 °C (1,112 °F) in the presence of steam; this is called steam cracking. The resulting ethylene is used to make antifreeze (ethylene glycol), PVC (via vinyl chloride), and many other polymers, such as polyethylene and polystyrene.
Semiconductors
The process of metalorganic vapour-phase epitaxy (MOCVD) entails pyrolysis of volatile organometallic compounds to give semiconductors, hard coatings, and other applicable materials. The reactions entail thermal degradation of precursors, with deposition of the inorganic component and release of the hydrocarbons as gaseous waste. Since it is an atom-by-atom deposition, these atoms organize themselves into crystals to form the bulk semiconductor. Raw polycrystalline silicon is produced by the chemical vapor deposition of silane gases:
SiH4 → Si + 2 H2
Gallium arsenide, another semiconductor, forms upon co-pyrolysis of trimethylgallium and arsine.
Waste management
Pyrolysis can also be used to treat municipal solid waste and plastic waste. The main advantage is the reduction in volume of the waste. In principle, pyrolysis will regenerate the monomers (precursors) to the polymers that are treated, but in practice the process is neither a clean nor an economically competitive source of monomers.
In tire waste management, tire pyrolysis is a well-developed technology.
Other products from car tire pyrolysis include steel wires, carbon black and bitumen. The area faces legislative, economic, and marketing obstacles. Oil derived from tire rubber pyrolysis has a high sulfur content, which gives it high potential as a pollutant; consequently it should be desulfurized.
Alkaline pyrolysis of sewage sludge at low temperature of 500 °C can enhance H2 production with in-situ carbon capture. The use of NaOH (sodium hydroxide) has the potential to produce H2-rich gas that can be used for fuels cells directly.
In early November 2021, the U.S. State of Georgia announced a joint effort with Igneo Technologies to build an $85 million large electronics recycling plant in the Port of Savannah. The project will focus on lower-value, plastics-heavy devices in the waste stream using multiple shredders and furnaces using pyrolysis technology.
Waste from pyrolysis itself can also be used for useful products. For example, contaminant-rich retentate from liquid-fed pyrolysis of postconsumer multilayer packaging waste can be used as novel building composite materials, which have higher compression strengths (10–12 MPa) than construction bricks and brickworks (7 MPa), as well as 57% lower density, 0.77 g/cm3.
One-stepwise pyrolysis and two-stepwise pyrolysis for tobacco waste
Pyrolysis has also been used in trying to mitigate tobacco waste. One method was done where tobacco waste was separated into two categories, TLW (Tobacco Leaf Waste) and TSW (Tobacco Stick Waste). TLW was determined to be any waste from cigarettes and TSW was determined to be any waste from electronic cigarettes. Both TLW and TSW were dried at 80 °C for 24 hours and stored in a desiccator. Samples were grounded so that the contents were uniform. Tobacco Waste (TW) also contains inorganic (metal) contents, which was determined using an inductively coupled plasma-optical spectrometer. Thermo-gravimetric analysis was used to thermally degrade four samples (TLW, TSW, glycerol, and guar gum) and monitored under specific dynamic temperature conditions. About one gram of both TLW and TSW were used in the pyrolysis tests. During these analysis tests, CO2 and N2 were used as atmospheres inside of a tubular reactor that was built using quartz tubing. For both CO2 and N2 atmospheres the flow rate was 100 mL min−1. External heating was created via a tubular furnace. The pyrogenic products were classified into three phases. The first phase was biochar, a solid residue produced by the reactor at 650 °C. The second phase liquid hydrocarbons were collected by a cold solvent trap and sorted by using chromatography. The third and final phase was analyzed using an online micro GC unit and those pyrolysates were gases.
Two different types of experiments were conducted: one-stepwise pyrolysis and two-stepwise pyrolysis. One-stepwise pyrolysis consisted of a constant heating rate (10 °C min−1) from 30 to 720 °C. In the second step of the two-stepwise pyrolysis test the pyrolysates from the one-stepwise pyrolysis were pyrolyzed in the second heating zone which was controlled isothermally at 650 °C. The two-stepwise pyrolysis was used to focus primarily on how well CO2 affects carbon redistribution when adding heat through the second heating zone.
First noted was the thermolytic behaviors of TLW and TSW in both the CO2 and N2 environments. For both TLW and TSW the thermolytic behaviors were identical at less than or equal to 660 °C in the CO2 and N2 environments. The differences between the environments start to occur when temperatures increase above 660 °C and the residual mass percentages significantly decrease in the CO2 environment compared to that in the N2 environment. This observation is likely due to the Boudouard reaction, where we see spontaneous gasification happening when temperatures exceed 710 °C. Although these observations were seen at temperatures lower than 710 °C it is most likely due to the catalytic capabilities of inorganics in TLW. It was further investigated by doing ICP-OES measurements and found that a fifth of the residual mass percentage was Ca species. CaCO3 is used in cigarette papers and filter material, leading to the explanation that degradation of CaCO3 causes pure CO2 reacting with CaO in a dynamic equilibrium state. This being the reason for seeing mass decay between 660 °C and 710 °C. Differences in differential thermogram (DTG) peaks for TLW were compared to TSW. TLW had four distinctive peaks at 87, 195, 265, and 306 °C whereas TSW had two major drop offs at 200 and 306 °C with one spike in between. The four peaks indicated that TLW contains more diverse types of additives than TSW. The residual mass percentage between TLW and TSW was further compared, where the residual mass in TSW was less than that of TLW for both CO2 and N2 environments concluding that TSW has higher quantities of additives than TLW.
The one-stepwise pyrolysis experiment showed different results for the CO2 and N2 environments. During this process the evolution of 5 different notable gases were observed. Hydrogen, Methane, Ethane, Carbon Dioxide, and Ethylene all are produced when the thermolytic rate of TLW began to be retarded at greater than or equal to 500 °C. Thermolytic rate begins at the same temperatures for both the CO2 and N2 environment but there is higher concentration of the production of Hydrogen, Ethane, Ethylene, and Methane in the N2 environment than that in the CO2 environment. The concentration of CO in the CO2 environment is significantly greater as temperatures increase past 600 °C and this is due to CO2 being liberated from CaCO3 in TLW. This significant increase in CO concentration is why there is lower concentrations of other gases produced in the CO2 environment due to a dilution effect. Since pyrolysis is the re-distribution of carbons in carbon substrates into three pyrogenic products. The CO2 environment is going to be more effective because the CO2 reduction into CO allows for the oxidation of pyrolysates to form CO. In conclusion the CO2 environment allows a higher yield of gases than oil and biochar. When the same process is done for TSW the trends are almost identical therefore the same explanations can be applied to the pyrolysis of TSW.
Harmful chemicals were reduced in the CO2 environment due to CO formation causing tar to be reduced. One-stepwise pyrolysis was not that effective on activating CO2 on carbon rearrangement due to the high quantities of liquid pyrolysates (tar). Two-stepwise pyrolysis for the CO2 environment allowed for greater concentrations of gases due to the second heating zone. The second heating zone was at a consistent temperature of 650 °C isothermally. More reactions between CO2 and gaseous pyrolysates with longer residence time meant that CO2 could further convert pyrolysates into CO. The results showed that the two-stepwise pyrolysis was an effective way to decrease tar content and increase gas concentration by about 10 wt.% for both TLW (64.20 wt.%) and TSW (73.71%).
Thermal cleaning
Pyrolysis is also used for thermal cleaning, an industrial application to remove organic substances such as polymers, plastics and coatings from parts, products or production components like extruder screws, spinnerets and static mixers. During the thermal cleaning process, at temperatures from 310 to 540 °C (600 to 1,000 °F), organic material is converted by pyrolysis and oxidation into volatile organic compounds, hydrocarbons and carbonized gas. Inorganic elements remain.
Several types of thermal cleaning systems use pyrolysis:
Molten Salt Baths belong to the oldest thermal cleaning systems; cleaning with a molten salt bath is very fast but implies the risk of dangerous splatters, or other potential hazards connected with the use of salt baths, like explosions or highly toxic hydrogen cyanide gas.
Fluidized Bed Systems use sand or aluminium oxide as heating medium; these systems also clean very fast but the medium does not melt or boil, nor emit any vapors or odors; the cleaning process takes one to two hours.
Vacuum Ovens use pyrolysis in a vacuum avoiding uncontrolled combustion inside the cleaning chamber; the cleaning process takes 8 to 30 hours.
Burn-Off Ovens, also known as Heat-Cleaning Ovens, are gas-fired and used in the painting, coatings, electric motors and plastics industries for removing organics from heavy and large metal parts.
Fine chemical synthesis
Pyrolysis is used in the production of chemical compounds, mainly, but not only, in the research laboratory.
The area of boron-hydride clusters started with the study of the pyrolysis of diborane (B2H6) at ca. 200 °C. Products include the clusters pentaborane and decaborane. These pyrolyses involve not only cracking (to give H2), but also recondensation.
The synthesis of nanoparticles, zirconia and oxides utilizing an ultrasonic nozzle in a process called ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP).
Other uses and occurrences
Pyrolysis is used to turn organic materials into carbon for the purpose of carbon-14 dating.
Pyrolysis liquids from slow pyrolysis of bark and hemp have been tested for their antifungal activity against wood decaying fungi, showing potential to substitute the current wood preservatives while further tests are still required. However, their ecotoxicity is very variable and while some are less toxic than current wood preservatives, other pyrolysis liquids have shown high ecotoxicity, what may cause detrimental effects in the environment.
Pyrolysis of tobacco, paper, and additives, in cigarettes and other products, generates many volatile products (including nicotine, carbon monoxide, and tar) that are responsible for the aroma and negative health effects of smoking. Similar considerations apply to the smoking of marijuana and the burning of incense products and mosquito coils.
Pyrolysis occurs during the incineration of trash, potentially generating volatiles that are toxic or contribute to air pollution if not completely burned.
Laboratory or industrial equipment sometimes gets fouled by carbonaceous residues that result from coking, the pyrolysis of organic products that come into contact with hot surfaces.
PAHs generation
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) can be generated from the pyrolysis of different solid waste fractions, such as hemicellulose, cellulose, lignin, pectin, starch, polyethylene (PE), polystyrene (PS), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET). PS, PVC, and lignin generate significant amount of PAHs. Naphthalene is the most abundant PAH among all the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
When the temperature is increased from 500 to 900 °C, most PAHs increase. With increasing temperature, the percentage of light PAHs decreases and the percentage of heavy PAHs increases.
Study tools
Thermogravimetric analysis
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) is one of the most common techniques to investigate pyrolysis with no limitations of heat and mass transfer. The results can be used to determine mass loss kinetics. Activation energies can be calculated using the Kissinger method or peak analysis-least square method (PA-LSM).
TGA can couple with Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and mass spectrometry. As the temperature increases, the volatiles generated from pyrolysis can be measured.
Macro-TGA
In TGA, the sample is loaded first before the increase of temperature, and the heating rate is low (less than 100 °C min−1). Macro-TGA can use gram-scale samples to investigate the effects of pyrolysis with mass and heat transfer.
Pyrolysis–gas chromatography–mass spectrometry
Pyrolysis mass spectrometry (Py-GC-MS) is an important laboratory procedure to determine the structure of compounds.
Machine learning
In recent years, machine learning has attracted significant research interest in predicting yields, optimizing parameters, and monitoring pyrolytic processes.

In materials science, quenching is the rapid cooling of a workpiece in water, gas, oil, polymer, air, or other fluids to obtain certain material properties. A type of heat treating, quenching prevents undesired low-temperature processes, such as phase transformations, from occurring. It does this by reducing the window of time during which these undesired reactions are both thermodynamically favorable and kinetically accessible; for instance, quenching can reduce the crystal grain size of both metallic and plastic materials, increasing their hardness.
In metallurgy, quenching is most commonly used to harden steel by inducing a martensite transformation, where the steel must be rapidly cooled through its eutectoid point, the temperature at which austenite becomes unstable. Rapid cooling prevents the formation of cementite structure, instead forcibly dissolving carbon atoms in the ferrite lattice. In steel alloyed with metals such as nickel and manganese, the eutectoid temperature becomes much lower, but the kinetic barriers to phase transformation remain the same. This allows quenching to start at a lower temperature, making the process much easier. High-speed steel also has added tungsten, which serves to raise kinetic barriers, which, among other effects, gives material properties (hardness and abrasion resistance) as though the workpiece had been cooled more rapidly than it really has. Even cooling such alloys slowly in the air has most of the desired effects of quenching; high-speed steel weakens much less from heat cycling due to high-speed cutting.
Extremely rapid cooling can prevent the formation of all crystal structures, resulting in amorphous metal or "metallic glass".
Quench hardening
Quench hardening is a mechanical process in which steel and cast iron alloys are strengthened and hardened. These metals consist of ferrous metals and alloys. This is done by heating the material to a certain temperature, depending on the material. This produces a harder material by either surface hardening or through-hardening varying on the rate at which the material is cooled. The material is then often tempered to reduce the brittleness that may increase from the quench hardening process. Items that may be quenched include gears, shafts, and wear blocks.
Purpose
Before hardening, cast steels and iron are of a uniform and lamellar (or layered) pearlitic grain structure. This is a mixture of ferrite and cementite formed when steel or cast iron are manufactured and cooled at a slow rate. Pearlite is not an ideal material for many common applications of steel alloys as it is quite soft. By heating pearlite past its eutectoid transition temperature of 727 °C and then rapidly cooling, some of the material's crystal structure can be transformed into a much harder structure known as martensite. Steels with this martensitic structure are often used in applications when the workpiece must be highly resistant to deformation, such as the cutting edge of blades. This is very efficient.
Process
The process of quenching is a progression, beginning with heating the sample. Most materials are heated to between 815 and 900 °C (1,499 and 1,652 °F), with careful attention paid to keeping temperatures throughout the workpiece uniform. Minimizing uneven heating and overheating is key to imparting desired material properties.
The second step in the quenching process is soaking. Workpieces can be soaked in air (air furnace), a liquid bath, or a vacuum. The recommended time allocation in salt or lead baths is up to 6 minutes. Soaking times can range a little higher within a vacuum. As in the heating step, it is important that the temperature throughout the sample remains as uniform as possible during soaking.
Once the workpiece has finished soaking, it moves on to the cooling step. During this step, the part is submerged into some kind of quenching fluid; different quenching fluids can have a significant effect on the final characteristics of a quenched part. Water is one of the most efficient quenching media where maximum hardness is desired, but there is a small chance that it may cause distortion and tiny cracking. When hardness can be sacrificed, mineral oils are often used. These oil-based fluids often oxidize and form sludge during quenching, which consequently lowers the efficiency of the process. The cooling rate of oil is much less than water. Intermediate rates between water and oil can be obtained with a purpose-formulated quenchant, a substance with an inverse solubility that therefore deposits on the object to slow the rate of cooling.
Quenching can also be accomplished using inert gases, such as nitrogen and noble gases. Nitrogen is commonly used at greater than atmospheric pressure ranging up to 20 bar absolute. Helium is also used because its thermal capacity is greater than nitrogen. Alternatively, argon can be used; however, its density requires significantly more energy to move, and its thermal capacity is less than the alternatives. To minimize distortion in the workpiece, long cylindrical workpieces are quenched vertically; flat workpieces are quenched on the edge; and thick sections should enter the bath first. To prevent steam bubbles the bath is agitated.
Often, after quenching, an iron or steel alloy will be excessively hard and brittle due to an overabundance of martensite. In these cases, another heat treatment technique known as tempering is performed on the quenched material to increase the toughness of iron-based alloys. Tempering is usually performed after hardening, to reduce some of the excess hardness, and is done by heating the metal to some temperature below the critical point for a certain period of time, then allowing it to cool in still air.
Mechanism of heat removal during quenching
Heat is removed in three particular stages:
Stage A: Vapor bubbles formed over metal and starts cooling
During this stage, due to the Leidenfrost effect, the object is fully surrounded by vapor which insulates it from the rest of the liquid.
Stage B: Vapor-transport cooling
Once the temperature has dropped enough, the vapor layer will destabilize and the liquid will be able to fully contact the object and heat will be removed much more quickly.
Stage C: Liquid cooling
This stage occurs when the temperature of the object is below the boiling point of the liquid.
History
There is evidence of the use of quenching processes by blacksmiths stretching back into the middle of the Iron Age, but little detailed information exists related to the development of these techniques and the procedures employed by early smiths. Although early ironworkers must have swiftly noticed that processes of cooling could affect the strength and brittleness of iron, and it can be claimed that heat treatment of steel was known in the Old World from the late second millennium BC, it is hard to identify deliberate uses of quenching archaeologically. Moreover, it appears that, at least in Europe, "quenching and tempering separately do not seem to have become common until the 15th century"; it is helpful to distinguish between "full quenching" of steel, where the quenching is so rapid that only martensite forms, and "slack quenching", where the quenching is slower or interrupted, which also allows pearlite to form and results in a less brittle product.
The earliest examples of quenched steel may come from ancient Mesopotamia, with a relatively secure example of a fourth-century BC quench-hardened chisel from Al Mina in Turkey. Book 9, lines 389-94 of Homer's Odyssey is widely cited as an early, possibly the first, written reference to quenching:
as when a man who works as a blacksmith plunges a screaming great axe blade or adze into cold water, treating it for temper, since this is the way steel is made strong, even so Cyclops' eye sizzled about the beam of the olive.
However, it is not beyond doubt that the passage describes deliberate quench-hardening, rather than simply cooling. Likewise, there is a prospect that the Mahabharata refers to the oil-quenching of iron arrowheads, but the evidence is problematic.
Pliny the Elder addressed the topic of quenchants, distinguishing the water of different rivers. Chapters 18–21 of the twelfth-century De diversis artis by Theophilus Presbyter mentions quenching, recommending amongst other things that 'tools are also given a harder tempering in the urine of a small, red-headed boy than in ordinary water'. One of the fuller early discussions of quenching is the first Western printed book on metallurgy, Von Stahel und Eysen, published in 1532, which is characteristic of late-medieval technical treatises.
The modern scientific study of quenching began to gain real momentum from the seventeenth century, with a major step being the observation-led discussion by Giambattista della Porta in his 1558 Magia Naturalis.

Quick clay, also known as Leda clay and Champlain Sea clay in Canada, is any of several distinctively sensitive glaciomarine clays found in Canada, Norway, Russia, Sweden, Finland, the United States, and other locations around the world. The clay is so unstable that when a mass of quick clay is subjected to sufficient stress, the material behavior may drastically change from that of a particulate material to that of a watery fluid. Landslides occur because of the sudden soil liquefaction caused by external solicitations such as vibrations induced by an earthquake, or massive rainfalls.
Quick clay main deposits
Quick clay is found only in countries close to the North Pole, such as Russia, Canada, Norway, Sweden, Finland, and the United States (in Alaska), since they were glaciated during the Pleistocene epoch. In Canada, the clay is associated primarily with the Pleistocene-era Champlain Sea, in the modern Ottawa Valley, the St. Lawrence Valley, and the Saguenay River regions.
Quick clay has been the underlying cause of many deadly landslides. In Canada alone, it has been associated with more than 250 mapped landslides. Some of these are ancient, and may have been triggered by earthquakes.
Clay colloids stability
Quick clay has a remolded strength which is much less than its strength upon initial loading. This is caused by its highly unstable clay particle structure.
Quick clay is originally deposited in a marine environment. Clay mineral particles are always negatively charged because of the presence of permanent negative charges and pH dependent charges at their surface. Because of the need to respect electro-neutrality and a net zero electrical charge balance, these negative electrical charges are always compensated by the positive charges born by cations (such as Na+) adsorbed onto the surface of the clay, or present in the clay pore water. Exchangeable cations are present in the clay minerals interlayers and on the external basal planes of clay platelets. Cations also compensate the negative charges on the clay particle edges caused by the protolysis of silanol and aluminol groups (pH dependent charges). So, clay platelets are always surrounded by an electrical double layer (EDL), or diffuse double layer (DDL). The thickness of EDL depends on the salinity of water. Under salty conditions (at high ionic strength) EDL is compressed (or said to be collapsed). It facilitates the aggregation of clay platelets which flocculate and stick together in a more stable aggregates structure. After the marine clay deposit is uplifted and is no longer exposed to salt water conditions, rainwater can slowly infiltrate the poorly compacted clay layer and the excess of NaCl present in seawater can also diffuse out of the clay. As a result, the EDL is less compressed and can expand. It results in a stronger electrostatic repulsion between negatively charged clay platelets which can more easily become dispersed and form stable suspensions in water (peptization phenomenon). The effect leads to a destabilization of the clay aggregates structure.
In case of insufficient mechanical compaction of the clay layer, and with a shear stress, the weaker EDL compression by the salts in the quick clay results in clay particle repulsion and leads to their realignment in a structure that is weaker and unstable. Quick clay regains strength rapidly when salt is again added (compression of the EDL), which allows clay particles to restore their cohesion with one another.
Formation of quick clay
At the height of the past glaciation (about 20,000 years ago), the land was 'pushed' down by the weight of the ice (isostatic depression). All of the ground-up rock was deposited in the surrounding ocean, which had penetrated significantly inland. The loose deposition of the silt and clay particles in the marine environment, allowed an unusual flocculation to take place. Essentially, this formed a strongly bonded soil skeleton, which was 'glued' by highly mobile sea-salt ions.
At this point, there was only the formation of very strong marine clay, which is found all over the world and highly stable, but with its own unique geotechnical problems. When the glaciers retreated, the land mass rose (post-glacial rebound), the clay was exposed, and formed the soil mass for new vegetation. The rainwater in these northern countries was quite aggressive to these clays, perhaps because it was softer (containing less calcium), or the higher silt content allowed more rainwater and snowmelt to penetrate. The final result was that the ionic 'glue' of the clay was weakened, to give a weak, loose soil skeleton, enclosing significant amounts of water (high sensitivity with high moisture content).
Quick clay deposits are rarely located directly at the ground surface, but are typically covered by a normal layer of topsoil. While this topsoil can absorb most normal stresses, such as normal rainfall or a modest earth tremor, a shock that exceeds the capacity of the topsoil layer — such as a larger earthquake, a large mass added near a slope, or an abnormal rainfall which leaves the topsoil fully saturated so that additional water has nowhere to permeate except into the clay — can disturb the clay and initiate the process of liquefaction.
Disasters
Because the clay layer is typically covered with topsoil, a location which is vulnerable to a quick clay landslide is usually identifiable only by soil testing, and is rarely obvious to a casual observer. Thus human settlements and transportation links have often been built on or near clay deposits, resulting in a number of notable catastrophes:
In 1702, a landslide destroyed almost all traces of the medieval town Sarpsborg in what is now Østfold county in Norway. 15 people and 200 animals were killed.
On 19 May 1893, a landslide in Verdal Municipality, Norway, killed 116 people and destroyed 105 farms. It left a crater several kilometers in diameter.
The most disastrous such landslide to affect North America occurred in 1908, when a slide into the frozen Du Lièvre River propelled a wave of ice-filled water into Notre-Dame-de-la-Salette, Quebec, causing the loss of 33 lives and the destruction of 12 homes.
In 1955, a landslide affected part of the downtown of Nicolet, Quebec, causing $10 million in damages.
In 1957, a large quick-clay landslide occurred in Lilla Edet, by the Göta River, in southwestern Sweden. A large part of a factory slid into the river, causing a thirty meter reduction in the river width. The earth mass coming into the river produced an approximately six meter high wave.
On March 27, 1964, parts of Anchorage, Alaska built on sandy bluffs overlying "Bootlegger Cove clay" near Cook Inlet, most notably the Turnagain neighborhood, suffered landslide damage during the 1964 Alaska Earthquake. The neighborhood lost 75 houses in the landslide, and the destroyed area has since been turned into Earthquake Park.
On 4 May 1971, 31 lives were lost when 40 homes were swallowed in a retrogressive flowslide in Saint-Jean-Vianney, Quebec, resulting in the relocation of the entire town when the government declared the area uninhabitable due to the presence of Leda clay. The event at Saint-Jean-Vianney contributed to the abandonment of the town of Lemieux, Ontario, in 1991, after a 1989 study showed it was also located on the same type of clay along the South Nation River. In 1993, those findings were borne out when the town's abandoned main street was swallowed by a massive 17-hectare landslide.
On November 30, 1977, the Tuve landslide in western Sweden killed 9 people and destroyed 67 houses.
Another famous flow of quick clay in Rissa Municipality, Norway, in 1978 caused about 33 hectares (82 acres) of farmland to liquefy and flow into the lake Botn over a few hours, with the loss of one life. The Rissa slide was well recorded by local citizens and a documentary film was made about it in 1981. The Norwegian Geotechnical Institute maintains the official copy of this documentary film.
On 11 May 2010, quick clay took the lives of a family living in Saint-Jude, Quebec, when the land their house was built on suddenly tumbled down toward the Salvail River. The landslide was so sudden that the family members died where they sat; they had been watching an ice hockey game on television. The slide took out a portion of rural road which took a year to reinstate.
On 2 February 2015, a landslide collapsed a pillar on the Skjeggestad Bridge in South-East Norway. The landslide was caused by nearby earthworks.
On 3 June 2020, eight buildings were swept into the sea by a landslide in Kråkneset in Alta Municipality in Norway. The landslide was filmed by a resident. There were no casualties, and a dog was rescued from the sea.
On 30 December 2020, part of a housing area was swept away by a landslide in the village of Ask in Gjerdrum Municipality in Norway, about 25 kilometres (16 mi) northeast of the capital Oslo. The 300-by-700-metre (980 ft × 2,300 ft) quick clay landslide wrecked several houses and killed 10 people.
On 23 September 2023, near the town of Stenungsund, Sweden, an area of c. 15 hectares (37 acres) was affected by a quick clay landslide, which among other things damaged the E6 motorway between Gothenburg and Oslo.
On 30 August 2025, the western Nesvatnet lakeshore collapsed in Levanger Municipality, in Trøndelag county, in Norway. This landslide, most likely caused by quick clay, has left a big gap in the new E6 road, the old E6 road and the railway track Nordlandsbanen, between Åsen and Levanger, 63km (39 miles) northeast of Trondheim. One Danish railroad worker was reported missing and likely lost his life in the landslide.
These landslides are retrogressive, meaning they usually start at water, and progress upwards at slow walking speed, although particularly deep quick clay layers on sloped regions may collapse much more rapidly, or in very large chunks that can slide at great speed due to the liquid nature of the disturbed clay. They have been known to penetrate kilometers inland, and consume everything in their path.
In modern times, areas known to have quick clay deposits are commonly tested in advance of any major human development. It is not always possible to entirely avoid building on a quick clay site, although modern engineering techniques have found technical precautions which can be taken to mitigate the risk of disaster. For example, when Ontario's Highway 416 had to pass through a quick clay deposit near Nepean, lighter fill materials such as polystyrene were used for the road bed, vertical wick drains were inserted along the route and groundwater cutoff walls were built under the highway to limit water infiltration into the clay.

Khadga is a traditional sacrificial sword used in the Hindu ritual sacrifice of animals. The large, curved blade is designed to decapitate a sacrificial animal in a single stroke. Khadgas are used in a hacking swing, with the added weight on the curved end being intended for decapitations. The sword's hilt and blade were often adorned with precious stones and metals.
Khadgas are often depicted in Hindu religious imagery, often being wielded by the goddesses Durga and Kali. The sword is often embellished with religious imagery, symbols, and texts. This type of ritual sword was used widely by cultures in multiple regions including: Assam, Bengal, Odisha, East India, Nepal, and North India.

The Ranni Forest Division in Kerala, India, was constituted on 7 July 1958, comprising the Ranni, Vadasserikkara and Goodrical ranges, with its headquarters at Ranni. It covers the parts of Konni reserve forest and the reserves of Ranni, Goodrical, Rajampara, Karimkulam, Kumaramperoor, Valiyakavu, and Schettakkal. It covers an area of 1,059 square kilometres (409 sq mi). It is the largest forest division by area in Kerala
Types of forests and composition
Reserve forests covering 1,057 square kilometres (408 sq mi) and vested forests covering 1.5 square kilometres (0.6 sq mi) are the major types of forests in this division. The Ranni Forest Division, with its natural beauty and richness in flora and fauna, is a storehouse of many varieties of plants and animals. The forests in the Ranni range can be classified into the following categories.
West coast tropical evergreen forests
West coast semi-evergreen forests
Southern moist mixed deciduous forests
Southern sub tropical wet hill forests
Southern montane wet temperate forests
Reed breakes
Grass lands
Manmade forests
Divisions of Ranni forest
Goodrical range
The Goodrical forest range is situated in the eastern side of Pathanamthitta district, with an area of 654 square kilometres (253 sq mi). Comparatively, human interference is less in these forests than in others in India. But at times of the Sabarimala pilgrimage, these forests ranges are crowded with devotees. Evergreen and semi-evergreen types of forests are here. There are three forest stations under this range:
Plappally
Kochukoikkal
Pachakkanam
Vadasserikkara range
The Vadasserikkara range lies to the eastern part of Ranni, with its headquarters at Vadasserikkara. This range covers an area of almost 268 square kilometres (103 sq mi) of the Ranni Forest Division. Kakkattar and Kallar, tributaries of the Pamba River, flow through this range. Small-scale agriculture is done in the populated regions of the Vadasserikkara range, especially on the gentle slopes. The natural forests of this range are classified into west coast tropical evergreen forests, west coast semi-evergreen forests, southern moist mixed deciduous forests, and grasslands. There are three forest stations under Vadasserikkara:
Chittar
Gurunathanmannu
Thannithodu
Ranni range
The Ranni range covers an area of 136.2 square kilometres (53 sq mi), and its headquarters is at Ranni. Evergreen, semi-evergreen, and deciduous types of forests can be seen here. The three forest stations under this range are:
Karikulam
Kanamala
Rajampara
Index of flora and fauna
Flora
Many unique plants and herbs can be seen in these forest ranges. Medical plants such as Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus), Solanum anguivi, Desmodium gangeticum, Cissus quadrangularis, Pseudarthria viscida, Strobilanthes ciliatus, and Dysoxylum malabaricum (Vella akil) grow in the deeper parts of the forest. The eco-system of the forests here is suitable for the growth of these plants. A complete list of plants seen in Ranni division is given below.
Fauna
Fishes and amphibians
The natural streams and rivers in these ranges are the repository of varied fish species and amphibians. Almost 51 species of fishes and 43 species of amphibians were reported from the various streams and water bodies in the forest divisions of Ranni. They are the following.
For more details
Reptiles and mammals
Kerala's forests are the storehouse of many species of reptiles and mammals. Reptiles of 59 species and mammals of 34 species were reported from the forests of Ranni. The rain forests here are the habitat of the venomous King cobra. Many King cobras were caught by Vava Suresh, the snake expert and wildlife conservationist for the Angamoozhy, Chittar, and Moozhiyar regions in the Goodrical range. The mammals are also rich in number, with countless species in these forests.
Birds
There are abundant species of birds in these forests, including some that face extinction. There are 196 known species of birds reported from the Ranni division.
Tribal settlements
The forest ranges of Ranni are inhabited by many tribal communities, mainly the Ulladan, Vettuvan and Malavedan, each having their own traditions and beliefs.

Redgra, sometimes styled as RedGra, Red-Gra, or generically as redgra, is the brand name of an all-weather surfacing material primarily composed of red clay and fine limestone gravel. It is used on baseball diamonds, running tracks and long jump run-ups, and hard-surface association football, netball, cricket, and field hockey pitches in the United Kingdom.
History
Outdoor field hockey in the United Kingdom during the 1910s and 1920s often relied on heavy clay surfaces that were unplayable after heavy rain or under frost. Teams would fall back to more durable, but harsher, tarmac surfaces.
To address this, tennis court contractors Grimshaw Sports developed Redgra in 1959 by adapting the company's existing mix used for tennis courts. The limestone and clay were sourced from the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire. The material was designed for the United Kingdom's first all-weather outdoor field hockey pitches. One of the first academic applications was opened on 4 March 1961 at Dean Close School under the recommendation of Olympic field hockey bronze medalist Denys Carnill for the school's field hockey team. A Redgra area was opened in October 1961 at the site of Harlow Sportcentre, which was completed in 1964. In 1964, the Crystal Palace National Recreation Centre included a Redgra training area and separate football practice pitch.
Redgra also saw use in other pavement applications, such as garden paths and car parks.
Properties
Redgra can be applied similarly to sand, binds itself when wet and compacted, and solidifies after 24 hours. As a sports surface, Redgra allowed for year-round use with minimal maintenance in academic and practice settings, and allowed for multi-sport use as tennis courts. Its natural components were inexpensive and simple to install. A Redgra field hockey pitch installed at Cranleigh School and opened on 1 February 1968 cost £4,500 for materials and lasted until 2005. The resulting surface was porous, allowing for easy drainage, and frost-resistant. Pat Ward-Thomas, a writer for The Guardian, noted that contemporary surfaces often failed to provide smooth, precise, and predictable ball movement but praised the Redgra pitch's performance.
While competitive teams still often favored playing on well-maintained grass surfaces, Redgra surfaces sometimes substituted when rain or poor maintenance made grass unsuitable.
Redgra also saw use in playground football, youth clubs, and some women's and lower-tier men's football clubs into the 1990s. The first training pitch for Chelsea Ladies F.C. in 1992, then composed mostly of under-18 players, was a Redgra surface at a community college near Feltham.
Drawbacks
Even upon its unveiling, Redgra was considered adequate for training surfaces but questionable as a full-time competitive surface. Redgra has a reputation for causing abrasions and splinters when sliding on it compared to grass, and its hardness contributed to injuries when falling on it. When dry, the surface generated considerable amounts of red dust. The surface could become alternately sticky and slippery in frosty conditions, and if improperly drained could become muddy.
Replacement
Since the 1990s, many Redgra installations for field hockey and association football have been supplanted by newer all-weather surfaces, such as artificial turf, that are more similar to natural grass or have impact-cushioning layers. However, it remains in use for public recreation tracks.
While an artificial surface, Redgra's natural components don't present the same concerns to landfills upon disposal as rubber or other synthetic surfaces.

The rescue of Bat 21 Bravo, the call sign for Iceal "Gene" Hambleton (a navigator aboard an EB-66C aircraft shot down behind North Vietnamese lines), was the "largest, longest, and most complex search-and-rescue" operation during the Vietnam War. Five additional aircraft were shot down during rescue attempts, directly resulting in the deaths of 11 airmen, the capture of two others, and another airman trying to evade capture.
On 2 April 1972, the Easter Offensive, the largest combined arms operation of the entire Vietnam War, was in its third day. An early morning flight of two United States Air Force EB-66C aircraft was led by Bat 20. Hambleton was a navigator aboard Bat 21. The two aircraft were escorting a cell of three B-52s. Bat 21 was configured to gather signals intelligence, including identifying North Vietnamese anti-aircraft radar installations to enable jamming. Bat 21 was destroyed by an SA-2 surface-to-air missile (SAM) and Hambleton was the only survivor, parachuting behind the front lines into a battlefield filled with thousands of People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) soldiers.
Hambleton had Top Secret access to Strategic Air Command operations and was an expert in SAM countermeasures. The PAVN may have possessed information about his presence in Vietnam and his capture would have meant a huge intelligence bonanza for the Soviet Union.
Hambleton and 1st Lt. Mark Clark, who was shot down during rescue operations, were recovered from behind the front lines on two different nights in covert, night-time rescues carried out by U.S. Navy SEAL Thomas R. Norris and Republic of Vietnam Navy (RVNN) commandos. For their actions in rescuing the two men, Norris was awarded the Medal of Honor and RVNN Petty Officer Nguyễn Văn Kiệt was recognized with the Navy Cross. Nguyen was the only South Vietnamese sailor given that award during the war.
The Air Force did not put limits on what it took to rescue a downed airman. The direct and indirect cost of rescuing Hambleton was enormous and became a watershed event in Air Force search and rescue. To prevent friendly fire incidents, the Americans imposed a standard no-fire zone within a 27 kilometres (17 mi) radius of Hambleton and diverted aircraft to aid in his rescue. In addition to the direct casualties caused by the rescue mission, it is likely that South Vietnamese soldiers indirectly died as a result of their inability to obtain fire support.
The added deaths, loss of aircraft, and length of the rescue operation led the USAF to change the way they planned and conducted search and rescue missions. As a result, they developed new techniques and equipment to improve their ability to rescue downed airmen.
Operational background
At the time of Bat 21's mission, American combat forces had been vastly reduced in South Vietnam under President Richard Nixon's Vietnamization policy. The PAVN launched the Nguyen Hue Offensive against the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) and U.S. military on Friday, 30 March 1972. It was their largest attack of the war and was timed to take full advantage of the bad weather typical during monsoon season, offering low clouds and poor visibility. About 30,000 heavily equipped PAVN troops from the 304th and 308th Divisions and three separate infantry regiments of the B5 Front crossed the Vietnamese Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) into I Corps zone across the five northernmost provinces of South Vietnam.
In the 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) area between the Cam Lộ Bridge and Dong Ha Bridge, the PAVN were supported by two tank regiments of 150 Soviet T-54 and PT-76 tanks, 75 tracked anti-aircraft vehicles, an artillery regiment of 47 towed 130mm guns and the largest concentration of anti-aircraft weaponry of the entire war, including the advanced SA-2 SAM. Their main line of advance was along the axis of the north–south national highway QL-1.
When Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV) headquarters in Saigon learned of large PAVN movement south of the DMZ, a number of B-52s had been sent on Arc Light missions without escort, but were experiencing significantly increased SAM activity. The 42nd Tactical Electronic Warfare Squadron (42 TEWS) was tapped for assistance. The draw down of US forces had left the unit shorthanded and Hambleton was the senior officer among a group of senior navigators.
Hambleton assigned himself as navigator on the older EB-66C, which was configured to gather signals intelligence. The newer EB-66E was tasked with jamming SAM radar guidance systems so their missiles could not accurately target the aircraft. The EB-66's mission was to trawl for missiles, let them lock on to their aircraft, and then execute a SAM break, a violent turn and dive designed to throw off the pursuing missile. The SA-2 was the size of a telephone pole and carried a proximity fused warhead that was lethal within about 150 feet (46 m). Their guidance systems failed at about 2 Gs, while the EB-66 could achieve 5 Gs in its avoidance maneuver. The crew had successfully pulled a SAM break more than 100 times. The presence of North Vietnamese SAMs south of the DMZ had been tracked by Hambleton, but not everyone agreed they were present that far south.
Aircraft shot down
On Easter Sunday, 2 April 1972, two six-seat EB-66s (call signs Bat 21 and Bat 22) were flying pathfinder escort for a cell of three B-52s, which were given assignments to bomb Mu Gia or the Ban Karai Pass, the two primary access routes to the Ho Chi Minh Trail through Laos.
Hambleton was aboard Bat 21, EB-66C serial number 54-0466, over Quảng Trị Province, South Vietnam, just south of the DMZ. The airmen were surprised by the intensity of the anti-aircraft fire and SAM activity. The PAVN 365th Air Defense Division fired two volleys of SA-2 SAMs at the U.S. planes, but the EB-66s successfully thwarted the first volley. The PAVN pointed their Fan Song radar at the B-52s, targeting them unsuccessfully with radar guided anti-aircraft fire. When those missed, the PAVN fired two more SAMs optically at Bat 21, only turning on the guidance and radar system after the missiles were launched, which delayed the targeted aircraft's ability to detect and avoid them.
When the aircraft crew spotted the missiles, the pilot assumed they had as usual been fired from north of the DMZ. He began a SAM break to the south, away from the direction he assumed the missiles had been fired. One of the EWOs called "Negative! Negative!", and the pilot flipped the plane over on its other wing. This time the pilot was unable to evade the missiles. The first missile exploded immediately beneath the aircraft striking it at 29,000 feet (8,800 m).
Hambleton, whose call sign was Bat 21 Bravo, was the mission navigator and automatically set to be the first to eject in the event of an emergency. He was positioned immediately behind the pilot, who gave the signal for everyone to eject. Hambleton pulled the ejection seat handles and made eye contact with the pilot as his seat rocketed out of the dying plane. A moment later, the aircraft was struck by a second SA-2 and exploded. The remainder of the aircraft's six-man crew—Major Wayne L. Bolte, pilot; 1st Lieutenant Robin F. Gatwood, co-pilot; and EWOs Lieutenant Colonel Anthony R. Giannangeli, Lieutenant Colonel Charles A. Levis and Major Henry M. Serex—were unable to eject and they remain listed as missing in action.
Hambleton was due for some R&R, and his wife Gwen was planning to meet him in Thailand the next week. She received airplane tickets for her trip on the same day that her husband was shot down. Instead of going to the airport, she collapsed after seeing an Air Force officer and a chaplain walk up her sidewalk.
Surrounded by North Vietnamese
Maj. Jimmy D. Kempton from the 390th Tactical Fighter Squadron was leading a flight of four F-4 Phantoms on a bombing mission when he got SAM warnings. He saw four SA-2 missiles emerge from the clouds about 2 miles (3.2 km) ahead of him and saw one strike Bat 21. At a lower altitude, 1st Lt. Bill Jankowski and Capt. Lyle Wilson in an O-2 (Bilk 34) forward air controller (FAC) aircraft saw Bat 21 explode.
Hambleton parachuted into the middle of more than 30,000 troops pouring across the border into South Vietnam. When Hambleton's URC-64 rescue radio beeped, Jankowski responded, and was surprised to learn that Hambleton was above him descending in his parachute. Jankowski followed Hambleton down. Hambleton was concealed by a low fog bank as he landed in a dry rice paddy, unseen by the PAVN troops.
As Jankowski observed Hambleton land, his aircraft came under heavy antiaircraft fire. He was astonished at the huge number of PAVN troops, equipment, and heavy weapons in the area. Hambleton found refuge in a group of bushes in the middle of the rice paddy. PAVN troops were less than 100 metres (330 ft) away. Jankowski fixed Hambleton's location 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) north of the Cam Lo Bridge and just north of TL-88, a major east–west secondary road.
Kempton and Jankowski relayed Hambleton's coordinates to King 22, a HC-130 search and rescue (SAR) aircraft operating just south of Quảng Trị. Recovering Hambleton quickly was essential, as the odds of recovering downed airmen dropped below twenty percent if the aircrew member was on the ground after four hours. But their efforts would be severely hampered by the huge number of troops and large quantity of anti-aircraft fire in the area, some of it supporting the PAVN's efforts to capture and protect the Cam Lo Bridge near Hambleton's position.
At about the same time that Hambleton was shot down, Capt. John Ripley, adviser to the Vietnamese 3rd Marine Battalion, blew up the key Highway QL-1 bridge over the Cua Viet River, east of Hambleton's position, at Đông Hà. The PAVN re-routed thousands of troops, dozens of tanks and other equipment west along TL-88, immediately in front of Hambleton's position, to the Cam Lo River bridge 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) to the west.
Intelligence value
Hambleton had more than 20 years of military service. He had served in the Army Air Force as a radio operator during World War II, though not in combat. After World War II, he was recalled to active service by the USAF in the early 1950s. During the Korean War he flew 43 combat missions as a navigator in a B-29 bomber. He then worked during the 1960s on various USAF ballistic missile projects including the PGM-19 Jupiter, Titan I ICBM and Titan II ICBM. He had been the deputy chief of operations for the USAF Strategic Air Command 390th Strategic Missile Wing before the Vietnam War.
In April 1972 he was reassigned from the SAC to TAC and to the 42nd TEWS, 388th Tactical Fighter Wing, at Korat, Thailand. He was familiar with targeting both SAC missiles and SAC airplanes, was one of the most knowledgeable missile and electronic counter-measures experts in Vietnam, and it is likely that his situation was quickly reported to U.S. intelligence services. Very few Americans remained on the ground in Vietnam, and the PAVN made it a point to track particularly valuable personnel, even in Thailand.
The North Vietnamese were probably supported by the Russians with decrypting American message traffic and they likely knew exactly who had parachuted into their midst. This ability was likely enabled by the then unknown American spy CWO John Anthony Walker, who had given the Soviets a radio cipher card and other high-value intelligence. Hambleton's capture would be a terrific blow to American airpower around the world and a huge prize for the North Vietnamese and indirectly, the Soviets. Hambleton said after the war that he felt sure if he were captured that he would never have been taken to Hanoi.
Air rescue attempts
Hambleton had received water survival training at Turkey Run, Florida, and escape and evasion training and survival basics at the Pacific Air Command Jungle Survival School in the Philippines.
He had shrapnel wounds from his aircraft exploding, a ripped finger, and four compressed vertebra from the force of the ejection. Hidden in a clump of trees in his hole, surrounded by North Vietnamese less than 100 metres (330 ft) away, Hambleton decided that with only nine months to go until his retirement, he was going to survive and return home.
1st Lt. Richard Abbot, flying a FAC O-2, had been shot down offshore shortly before Hambleton. When Abbot was picked up by the USS Hamner, two Air Force search and rescue Douglas A-1 Skyraiders (Capt. Don Morse in Sandy 07 and his wingman in Sandy 08) from the 1st Special Operations Squadron remained in Hambleton's vicinity. The Sandys immediately scrambled to cover Hambleton's position. When Morse in Sandy 07 first got the call, he thought that, because the aircraft had gone down in South Vietnam, the SAR effort could be accomplished fairly quickly.
When he got over Hambleton's position, he was shocked at the amount of ground fire he received. It was more intense than anything he had seen in the war. Some pilots reported that the intensity of the antiaircraft fire was equal to that around Hanoi. Although the U.S. and ARVN forces did not know it yet, the offensive was the largest combined arms attack conducted by the North Vietnamese during the war.
Hambleton coolly relayed the coordinates of the North Vietnamese around him, watched the ordnance explode, and directed corrections to the FAC above, who relayed the information to the A-1s and the F-4 Phantom fighter-bombers. FAC pilots after the event were universally amazed at Hambleton's ability to remain calm and direct accurate fire around his position.
Morse called for emergency support, which was picked up by a UH-1H (Blue Ghost 39) near Huế, piloted by 1st Lt. Byron Kulland from F Troop, 8th Cavalry, 196th Brigade. Normally based at Marble Mountain Air Facility near Da Nang, Kulland was in the area showing a photographer the developing battle. He had on board with him Capt. Thomas White, the Troop operations officer. After depositing the photographer and White at Phu Bai Combat Base, White directed Kulland to proceed north and contact the FAC (Jankowski) for information on arrival. White also sent two AH-1G Cobra gunships, Blue Ghost 28 and 24, and then added Blue Ghost 30, a second UH-1.
Blue Ghost 39 proceeded across the Mieu Giang River 50 feet (15 m) above the ground towards Hambleton's position with the Blue Ghost 28 Cobra gunship following about 3,000 feet (910 m) behind and 300 feet (91 m) above. Blue Ghost 24 waited at the south side of the Mieu Giang River for Blue Ghost 30 to catch up. As soon as Blue Ghost 39 and 28 crossed the Mieu Giang River they were met by an immediate curtain of North Vietnamese fire from every direction, hurled against them with a strong intensity. Rosebeary in Blue Ghost 28 responded with rockets and 40mm fire, but both helicopters were struck multiple times.
Kulland flying Blue Ghost 39 tried to turn back south but only managed to crash-land his stricken aircraft, about 6.7 kilometres (4.2 mi) east of Hambleton and 0.9 miles (1.4 km) north of the river in an area full of PAVN. When the helicopter smashed into the ground, the only mobile crew member was SP5 Jose Astorga, the door gunner, who had been wounded. He tried but was unable to extract other hurt crew members. Paschall was pinned in the wreckage. Frink, who was seriously wounded, urged Astorga to get out and away from the aircraft. A few moments later advancing PAVN soldiers fired on the wreckage with automatic weapons and the aircraft's fuel tank exploded with the remainder of the crew inside. Astorga was captured, but pilots 1st Lt. Byron Kulland and WO John Frink along with SP5 Ronald Paschall were killed.
Rosebeary, flying Cobra Blue Ghost 28, called a Mayday but was able to safely exit the area and landed his severely damaged helicopter. His aircraft was totaled. He and Gunner Warrant Officer Charles Gorski were picked up by a HH-53C helicopter (Jolly Green 67), without incident. Rosebeary warned other aircraft against crossing the river. When Morse in Sandy 07 learned that the quick-snatch had failed, he and his wingman Sandy 08 broke off engaging the North Vietnamese and returned to Da Nang. Both Sandys were found to be so damaged they would take several days to repair.
At 21:00, Nail 59, a new version of the OV-10A Bronco aircraft equipped with the Pave Nail LORAN radar took over FAC duties. The SAR efforts were suspended for the night and the U.S. and ARVN forces remained unaware of the true strength of the PAVN offensive. Advised by the FAC to remain in place, Hambleton moved to a safer spot in the jungle and dug a hole to hide in until morning. During the night, Nail 59 and King 27, an HC-130 stayed. They suddenly found themselves painted by Fan Song radar and narrowly missed getting shot down as well. At 53 years old, Hambleton was not a prime candidate to survive the cold, wet weather conditions.
No fire zone
The Joint Search and Rescue Command (JSARC) was under the direction of the director of aerospace rescue, Colonel Cecil Muirhead, who could restrict airspace activity for the use of search and rescue forces. He also commanded all the dedicated assets needed to assist with SAR. Muirhead ordered 24-hour FAC coverage around Hambleton's position to watch over him and soften up the North Vietnamese positions around him.
To protect the downed airmen and the search and rescue forces, Muirhead also ordered the 7th Air Force to establish a standard 27 kilometres (17 mi) no-fire zone around Hambleton. It prohibited friendly artillery, naval gunfire, or aircraft from engaging any target in the zone without JSARC approval. Three North Vietnamese divisions were attacking and the ARVN 3rd Division could not reply for several hours with artillery or request tactical air strikes in the area.
More aircraft lost
On 3 April, air search and rescue forces attempted a first light rescue, which can successfully achieve surprise with minimal force. A search and rescue crew took off from the 37th AARS based at Nakhon Phanom, Thailand. It consisted of two HH-53 rescue helicopters, Jolly Green 65 and 67, and two A-1 Skyraiders, Sandy 07 and 08. Sandy 05 and 06 joined them on the scene. The area was covered in a solid overcast, preventing visual control of air strikes by the on-scene OV-10A FAC, Nail 25 which nevertheless coordinated the work of several F-4s who were directed to drop CBU-42 anti-personnel cluster bombs around Hambleton to help protect his position. When Nail 25 ran low on fuel, it was replaced by an OV-10 (Nail 38) from the 23rd TASS flown by Captain William J. Henderson and 1st Lieutenant Mark Clark.
The PAVN had a listening post in the area and overheard the American radio traffic. They were very familiar with American SAR tactics and on the second day they began to use the downed flyer as bait. They positioned a number of anti-aircraft gun and SAMs in the area near Hambleton. One pilot reported that "SAM calls were driving us into the small arms threat. Ground fire was accurate and well disciplined ... The [PAVN] were very definitely monitoring and jamming our communications."
Henderson obtained LORAN fixes on Hambleton's position. Coast Guard Lt. Commander Jay Crowe, an exchange pilot on assignment to the 37th ARRS at Da Nang, was piloting Jolly Green 65. The helicopter broke through the clouds and rapidly dropped into the area where Hambleton was hidden. The aircraft was immediately struck by a wall of North Vietnamese gunfire. Their rounds tore through the aircraft, destroying the instrument panel. Crowe struggled to get the aircraft out of the fire zone, and with his instruments shot up, he had to rely on external visual cues to fly the aircraft. He nursed the helicopter south and was able to get to the Phu Bai. Jolly Green 66 flown by Lt. Colonel Bill Harris followed, only to break through the low ceiling to face ten North Vietnamese tanks and a withering onslaught of ground fire. He fought the controls to bring his rescue helicopter within 100 yards (91 m) of Hambleton, his gunners firing the airship's three GAU-2/A 7.62 mm miniguns, engaging the North Vietnamese on every side. A pilot flying support, looking for targets to engage, asked, "Where's the enemy fire coming from?" Harris replied, "From everywhere!" Harris managed to get his badly damaged aircraft to gain altitude, then limp back to safety.
Forced to fly in and out of cloud cover at perilously low altitudes, FAC Nail 38, piloted by Henderson was hit by North Vietnamese fire and shot down. Henderson landed on the north side of the Mieu Giang River, about 500 metres (1,600 ft) from Hambleton. He hid in a bamboo patch until local villagers came looking for him and cut it down. He was taken north and became a POW. Clark parachuted to the ground safely on the south side of river and eluded capture. Later that same day, another UH-1H, unrelated to the rescue operation, was shot down in the same area carrying a crew of four.
After pinpointing Hambleton's location, the Air Force bombarded the area around him for the next three days. On 4 April, a flight of ten A-1 Skyraiders, half the total available in all of South Vietnam, attempted to pave the way for a SAR team, and it was badly shot up. Eight of the ten aircraft were damaged, two severely. The damage significantly affected the availability of the Skyraiders. At dusk, Major Jimmy D. Kempton flying F-4D 66-0265 with the 390th TFS and a wingman entered from the coast under a descending 500 feet (150 m) ceiling and dropped BLU-52 SAR ordnance on four sides of Hambleton's location, the last of SAR ordnance on 4 April.
On 5 April, bad weather prevented any SAR activity.
On 6 April at 15:15, a third attempt was made to pick Hambleton and now Clark up. Four A-1 Skyraiders (Sandys 01, 02, 05 and 06) prepared the area around the survivors with extensive bombing and strafing. They were assisted by two HH-53Cs (Jolly Green 67 and Jolly Green 60) from the 37th ARRS. During the day American fighters flew 52 sorties and four B-52 bombers bombed the area around Cam Lo.
On 6 April 80 SAMs were launched by the PAVN in the area around Hambleton. It was estimated that Hambleton and Clark were in the midst of five or six PAVN battalions. The PAVN air defense seriously challenged American air superiority and blunted the success of close air support in the area.
Capt. Peter Chapman volunteered to pilot Jolly Green 67, despite the fact that he was due to return home very soon. Capt. Boli in Sandy 01 decided they would pick up Hambleton first and Clark immediately after. At 17:10, Sandy 03 joined the group with a full load of white phosphorus that could be used to lay down a smoke screen. Sandy 01 called in additional strikes on targets around Hambleton's position and re-checked the area. North Vietnamese response was limited. Aware that it could be a trap, he nonetheless gave the go-ahead.
As Jolly Green 67 crossed the Mieu Giang River with Jolly Green 60 high and above guarding their approach, Jolly Green 67 began taking fire from all sides. As it approached Hambleton's position, they called for him to pop his smoke and reveal his position. The aircraft was pummeled with automatic weapons and anti-aircraft fire from all quarters. Hambleton hesitated, and the Jolly Green tried to pull away. Despite the best efforts of the remaining aircraft, Jolly Green 67 was critically damaged. Jolly Green 67 flew east at first, further into territory held by the North Vietnamese, before it turned southeast for a few kilometers, when a fire broke out in the left engine. Pieces of the tail rotor struck the main rotor, and the aircraft rolled and crashed on its left side, burning ferociously. No rescue beepers were heard. The entire crew was listed as MIA and presumed killed: Capt. Peter Hayden Chapman II (pilot), Capt. John Henry Call III (co-pilot), TSgt. William Roy Pearson, TSgt. Allen J. Avery (para-rescuemen), TSgt. Roy D. Prater (crew chief), and Sgt. James Harold Alley (combat photographer). The fire consuming the helicopter was so hot it melted parts of the aircraft and continued to burn for three more days. The helicopter crashed about 300 yards (270 m) from where Hambleton was hiding.
Hambleton's and Clark's spirits sank when they realized that six men died while attempting to rescue them. Hambleton considered surrendering. The new on-scene commander in charge of the entire rescue mission, Capt. John Van Etten, was flying an F-4 out of Da Nang (call sign Nail 32). He reminded Hambleton that people had died while attempting to rescue him and it'd be a waste if he stood up and was taken prisoner. Hambleton decided, "Hell, I'm going to get out of this, regardless." He camouflaged his hole, hiding there for seven nights and six days. He left the hole twice to scavenge for food and was almost caught the second time when he was spotted by a boy and his dog. PAVN soldiers searching for him passed within 20 feet (6.1 m) of his hole twice.
The SAR task force mission leader, Capt. Fred Boli in Sandy 01, called the rescue off for the time being because it was too dangerous. The remaining aircraft exited to the south across the Mieu Giang River. Hambleton and Clark would have to spend another night behind the front lines. The North Vietnamese, alerted by the American's intense efforts to find the navigator, increased their efforts to find Hambleton.
PAVN strength prevents air rescue
All of the SAR teams were experienced in conducting rescues into what they described as "hot LZs", but the airmen were shocked by the quantity and intensity of the ground and anti-aircraft fire they had faced since the rescue attempt began. This included not only small arms fire and the previously used 23mm, 37mm and 57mm towed guns, but the 85mm and 100mm towed guns, along with the self-propelled, radar-guided ZSU-57-2 AAA gun. Most surprising to the Americans were the large presence of SA-2 SAMs, and for the first time the use of the Soviet SA-7 Grail shoulder-fired, heat-seeking SAM.
37th ARRS commander Lt. Col. Bill Harris was upset. He concluded that the air rescue could not be attempted at that time due to the heavy concentration of North Vietnamese forces in the immediate area around Clark and Hambleton. He called Muirhead and told him that they had to find another way. Hambleton was told to sit tight while they worked up an alternative plan. Hambleton had two survival radios, a first aid kit, two kinds of flares, a knife and a .38 caliber revolver, a compass and a map, an empty water bottle, but no food.
On the morning of 7 April, 1st Lt. Bruce C. Walker accompanied by naval artillery spotter Marine Lt. Larry F. Potts were flying an OV-10A (Covey 282) from 20th Tactical Air Support Squadron. Potts was directing naval gunfire from the destroyer USS Buchanan against North Vietnamese tanks to protect Hambleton. At 11:05, an O-1 Bird Dog pilot observed a SAM launch and Covey 282 was shot down 3 miles (4.8 km) west of Highway 1 and 4 miles (6.4 km) north of Highway 9. Radio contact was established with both Potts and Walker, and both reported that they were uninjured, but each man was too close to North Vietnamese forces to attempt a rescue.
Clark hid on the south side of the Mieu Giang River, while Walker was about 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) north of Hambleton, who was on the north side of the river about 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) from the town of Cam Lo. Clark evaded capture for a number of days and was in contact with SAR personnel when he warned them away due to the proximity of PAVN forces.
The U.S. rescuers knew that the North Vietnamese were monitoring radio communications and understood English. Clark and Hambleton were several miles apart. A FAC told Clark, who was from Idaho, to "Get to the Snake, make like Esther Williams and float to Boston." In other words, get to the river and swim east.
It was Potts' 25th birthday. Potts was wounded and captured alive, but later died in Quang Binh prison. In January 1992, members of the Joint Task Force for Full Accounting examined war artifacts in the Hanoi military museum and found Potts' ID card. The disposition and location of Walker's remains are unknown.
Ground rescue
After five days and multiple attempts to rescue Hambleton, five aircraft had been shot down and another 16 seriously damaged, 10 service members had been killed or were missing in action, two were POWs and two were behind front lines also waiting to be rescued. On 8 April, COMUSMACV General Creighton Abrams was briefed on the high losses in the several failed attempts to rescue Hambleton and Clark. He ordered that no further air CSAR would be attempted, but that given Hambleton's Top Secret clearance and knowledge of missiles and counter-measure technology, that every effort should be made to bring him out.
USMC Col. Al Gray suggested a covert, land-based rescue operation. and Lt. Col. Andy Anderson, Commander of the Joint Personnel Recovery Center (JPRC, MACVSOG-80) ordered a ground rescue. In Saigon, Navy SEAL Lt. Thomas R. Norris, one of just three SEAL officers and nine enlisted men remaining in Vietnam, had just completed an assignment in the Mekong Delta. He was waiting for orders when the call came in for a commando operation to get Hambleton out. Norris was immediately dispatched to lead an operation to rescue Hambleton. He recruited five Vietnamese Sea Commando frogmen from the Lien Doan Nguoi Nhai (LDNN), Naval Advisory Detachment (NAD) in Da Nang.
ARVN 3rd Division commander Brigadier General Vũ Văn Giai gave Anderson a Ranger platoon of about 20 men and three M-48 tanks that they used to set up a forward operating base along Highway 9 within observation range of the strategic Cam Lo Bridge. But Giai thought that the mission was insane and refused to take responsibility for the mission once they crossed the Mieu Giang River. Anderson, who spoke Vietnamese, obtained additional intelligence from the headquarters of the 1st Armor Brigade near Dong Ha.
Ad hoc code used
Hambleton had a much more difficult task—to bypass North Vietnamese-occupied villages and gun emplacements. His rescuers learned that he was one of the best golfers in the Air Force and that he retained a detailed memory of the golf courses he had played. Improvising a code, they used a series of specific golf-course holes to guide him through the mine fields and get him to the Mieu Giang River. They radioed him, "You're going to play 18 holes and you're going to get in the Swanee and make like Esther Williams and Charlie the Tuna. The round starts on No. 1 at Tucson National."
Hambleton initially replied, "What have you been smoking?" But he broke the code. "It took me a half-hour to figure out they were giving me distance and direction," Hambleton explained. "No. 1 at Tucson National is 408 yards running southeast. They wanted me to move southeast 400 yards. The 'course' would lead me to water."
Using the golf-course code, he was directed through the abandoned village that had concealed the guns that shot down his would-be rescuers. Although the village had been bombed, he was confronted by a North Vietnamese soldier. Hambleton killed him using a knife in hand-to-hand combat. At one point, he was given directions to a "refreshment stand" where he would have to "tap his own keg". Physically exhausted, hungry and dehydrated, Hambleton found a banana plantation where he could tap the tree for drinking water. He got lost briefly, and then fell off a cliff, breaking his arm.
The U.S. command in Saigon ordered special high-altitude B-52 bombing raids on nearby targets to divert the Vietnamese from searching for the two men, who were several miles apart.
Commandos cross lines
Anderson now planned to rescue Hambleton and Clark. Norris and Anderson called in air strikes in an attempt to weaken the PAVN resistance, but the PAVN answered with mortar rounds and B-40 rockets that struck the team's position. Anderson, the senior American commander, and Lt. Tho Ngoc Vu, the senior Vietnamese commando, and all of the Vietnamese officers were hurt. The wounded Vietnamese troops had to be evacuated. One commando was killed. Norris was left with five Vietnamese commandos who spoke little English.
Clark was seriously weakened by five days hiding from PAVN forces with little to eat. Since he was closest to the team's position, Norris decided to rescue him first. The rescuer's initial plan was to swim upriver and meet Clark, but Norris tested the current and decided it was too strong. Clark was relayed instructions by the FAC overhead to get in the water after dark and float downstream where Norris and his team would intercept him. The rescue team would have to insert along the riverbank, a much more hazardous route.
Anderson, Norris and five Vietnamese commandos set up an overwatch position near the Mieu Giang River, which ran near the positions of both downed airmen. Anderson ordered Norris to take his team no more than 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) forward and wait for the survivors to come to them, but after departing, Norris ignored the order and turned off his radio. Traveling twice that distance upriver, he passed through frequent North Vietnamese patrols, trucks and columns of tanks.
Clark floated down the cold river and at about 02:00 to 03:00, Norris could hear his heavy breathing on the river. Norris was about to leave cover to pull Clark to shore when a six-man PAVN patrol walked between them. Norris remained hidden, hoping they wouldn't notice Clark's breathing, and knowing that using their weapons would expose the team's position to the hundreds of enemy troops around them. By the time the patrol passed by, Clark had floated on downstream. Norris radioed Clark and instructed him to get out of the river on the south bank.
On his own initiative, Norris left his team and swam downstream several hours looking for Clark. Near dawn, he saw some motion and found Clark hiding behind a sampan on the riverbank. Norris had to persuade Clark to follow him and was finally able to re-link up with the rest of his team. Norris delivered Clark to Anderson at the forward operating base. Clark was transported to the last outpost on the Cua Viet River at Dong Ha by an ARVN M113 armored personnel carrier and then flown to Da Nang.
On 9 April, Hambleton's eighth day of evading PAVN forces all around him, FAC Harold Icke on Bilk 11 kept in constant contact with Hambleton. Icke directed Sandy 01 to drop a Madden survival pack containing food, water, ammunition and extra radios to Hambleton, but it fell 50 metres (160 ft) away, slightly above him, and he was too weak to climb up to it. Icke and the pilots of two A-1 Skyraiders were shocked to see Hambleton come out his hiding place and stand in the open on a sandbar in the river, waving a white flag at them above. Icke knew Hambleton's mental and physical health were precarious. Unknown to him, Hambleton was considerably weakened, having lost 40 pounds (18 kg) in the 10 days since his jet had been shot down.
On 11 April, Hambleton was too weak to move any farther. Norris was well aware of the overwhelming North Vietnamese presence, but decided to proceed upriver again. Hambleton wasn't transmitting on schedule and his occasional radio calls were difficult to understand. Norris could only follow parts of Hambleton's weak transmissions, but knew he would have to go to him. North Vietnamese tanks were spotted at the Cam Lo bridge, and air strikes were carried out to destroy them before the team launched their second rescue mission. The PAVN fixed the location of the outpost and poured mortar and artillery fire on the forward ARVN outpost, killing two of the five remaining ARVN Seals. The wounded were evacuated the next morning.
Norris was left with only three Vietnamese commandos. During their search for Hambleton on the night of 12 April, they headed upriver more than 4 kilometres (2.5 mi), slipping through a massive PAVN force. During the night, upon seeing the extremely large number of North Vietnamese forces, two of the commandos declined to advance further, saying they "refused to follow an American just to rescue an American". Norris convinced them to stay by persuading them that the only way they would get back to safety was to stay with the team. They cautiously searched the river shore for two more hours without success and reluctantly returned to their forward operating base to rest and hope they would be more successful the next night. Icke fixed Hambleton's position during the day so Norris could find him that night.
On the night of 13 April, Norris didn't dare take the two soldiers who had faltered the night before. He was prepared to go alone when Petty Officer Third Class Nguyễn Văn Kiệt volunteered to go with him. Norris bluntly told Nguyễn that he wasn't sure either one of them would return. They worked their way slowly upriver until they came upon an empty, destroyed village. They found clothing and an abandoned sampan. Nguyễn and Norris, who was slightly built, donned Vietnamese clothing and disguised themselves as fishermen.
They rowed quietly up river, but even in the pitch dark and dense fog they could see large numbers of North Vietnamese soldiers and tanks on the shoreline. Stopping to check his map at one point, Norris suddenly realized that two PAVN soldiers were sitting about 10 metres (33 ft) away. However, they were asleep. Traveling upriver in the sampan, they broke out of the heavy fog and found themselves about 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) from their starting point, under the Cam Lo bridge. They had passed Hambleton's position more than 30 minutes ago. Turning around, they worked their way south before putting ashore and began to search for Hambleton.
They found him sitting in a clump of bushes, alive but partly delirious and extremely weakened, having eaten only four small ears of corn in 12 days and having lost 45 pounds (20 kg) since his plane was shot down. He weighed only 128 pounds (58 kg). Sunrise was coming, and although Norris thought it best to wait until dark to return downriver, Hambleton needed to be evacuated immediately. Despite the risk, Norris and Nguyễn hid Hambleton in the bottom of the sampan, covered him with bamboo, and started downriver.
Daylight evacuation
Their sampan was soon spotted by North Vietnamese troops, some of whom fired at them, but Norris and Nguyễn could not afford to return fire. They paddled furiously, using the current and dense foliage along the far side of the river to their advantage, and trying to out-distance the soldiers. However, when they rounded a bend in the river, the PAVN fired on them with a heavy caliber machine gun. They pulled the sampan to the bank and turned it over to provide some concealment. Icke in Bilk 11 overhead called in air support and five U.S. Navy A-4 Skyhawks from the carrier USS Hancock killed a number of North Vietnamese troops and provided cover for his final escape.
Two A-1 Skyraiders assisted, dropping both explosives and MK47 smoke bombs, providing a smokescreen. Returning to the river, the three men were soon able to receive support from South Vietnamese forces. Landing on the river bank, they were met by some ARVN soldiers. Hambleton was unable to walk and they carried him back to their bunker. There, an M113 armored personnel carrier carried Hambleton, Norris and Nguyen back to Brigade Headquarters in Dong Ha.
News reporters were very aware of the intense rescue efforts to bring Hambleton home. When the rescue team and Hambleton arrived at Dong Ha, a reporter commented to Norris, "It must have been tough out there. I bet you wouldn't do that again." Norris replied, "An American was down in enemy territory. Of course I'd do it again."
From Dong Ha, Hambleton was transported via US Army 571st Dustoff helicopter to the 95th Evacuation Hospital, Da Nang. He was shortly afterward evacuated to the hospital at Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, where he recuperated for a month.
Norris began to plan for the rescue of Walker, still more than a kilometer behind front lines. Walker managed to evade capture for almost 11 days when on the night of 18 April, without FAC coverage, he moved on his own accord and ran into a local villager who alerted the North Vietnamese. They began tracking him and the next morning the FAC saw PAVN very near Walker's position. Walker radioed the FAC that rescue should not be attempted because PAVN forces were closing in and he was under fire. Bilk 36, an OV-10A reported that Walker was surrounded by more than 20 PAVN soldiers and shortly afterward saw his body lying in the grass. Walker's body was never recovered.
Rescue cost
There were no rules to apply to determine when a search and rescue was no longer cost effective.
SAR priority
The Air Force remained fully committed to finding and bringing back every downed airman, regardless of the cost. Air crew's morale depended on it. Search and rescue was based on the premise that it was necessary "to secure the safety of pilots as valuable military assets and to enhance their effectiveness by boosting morale." On 2 June 1972, General John Vogt, commander of the 7th Air Force, sent a huge task force of 119 aircraft to rescue Capt. Roger Locher, an F-4 weapons officer who during Operation Linebacker had been shot down only 64 kilometres (40 mi) from Hanoi. When he was picked up by a HH-53 from the 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron, he was within 5 miles (8.0 km) of the heavily defended Yên Bái Air Base and had eluded capture while covering 19 kilometres (12 mi) in North Vietnamese territory for 23 days.
I had to decide whether we should risk the loss of maybe a dozen airplanes and crews just to get one man out. Finally I said to myself, Goddamn it, the one thing that keeps our boys motivated is the certain belief that if they go down, we will do absolutely everything we can to get them out. If that is ever in doubt, morale would tumble. That was my major consideration. So I took it on myself. I didn't ask anybody for permission. I just said, "Go do it!"
There were also political overtones to Hambleton's rescue. "U.S. personnel held as prisoners of war constituted a serious political liability to the U.S. government."
As many as 90 sorties a day were called in to suppress North Vietnamese forces around Hambleton. In contrast, prior to the Easter Offensive, the number of daily sorties was about 10, and during the action, peaked at about 300. During the multi-day effort to rescue the men, the Americans hit the North Vietnamese with over 800 air strikes in direct support of the rescue. Search and rescue took priority over almost all strike targets.
No-fire zone enforced
To protect the downed airmen and the search and rescue forces, Col. Cecil Muirhead ordered the 7th Air Force to establish a standard 27 kilometres (17 mi) no-fire zone around Hambleton shortly after he went down. It remained in effect until 22:00, and while in force it prohibited friendly artillery, naval gunfire, or aircraft from engaging any target within the designated area without JSARC approval. The no-fire zone encompassed nearly the entire combat zone of the ARVN 3rd Division including the crucial Cam Lo Bridge. As a result, the ARVN in the area was severely hampered in its efforts to stem the PAVN offensive against Dong Ha and Quang Tri City. During this six-hour period, thousands of PAVN troops pushed into the region.
When it was seen that PAVN forces were pouring through the gap unimpeded, the no-fire zone was reduced at 22:00 that night, but not before the action generated considerable debate. One ranking adviser commented, "When viewed in relation to all the events of the day, a worse decision could not have been made." Hambleton commented after the war, "If the taxpayers and my neighbors knew what it cost to pull me out of there, they'd probably shoot me."
Maj. David A. Brookbank, a U.S. Air Force liaison with the ARVN 3rd Division, reported, "The operation cost the 3rd ARVN dearly." He concluded that the restriction gave the North Vietnamese "an opportunity unprecedented in the annals of warfare to advance at will." He stated, "It seems logical to assume that many South Vietnamese troops died because air and artillery support were not available." He warned his superiors that the 3rd Division's officers resented the fact that the 7th Air Force would put thousands of South Vietnamese soldiers' lives at risk to rescue one of their own.
American response to the PAVN operation virtually ground to a halt as air resources were diverted to support the recovery, and for a few days defense of the northern border area was second in priority to rescuing Hambleton.
Casualties
As a direct result of the rescue operation, five aircraft were lost, 11 people were killed, and two were captured. Additional aircraft were seriously damaged. Hambleton wrote from an Air Force hospital after he was rescued, "I had to stand by and watch six young men die trying to save my life. It was a hell of a price to pay for one life. I'm very sorry." His rescue was, according to Stars and Stripes, "the biggest U.S. air rescue effort of the war."
During the Vietnam War, search and rescue forces saved 3,883 lives at the cost of 71 rescuers and 45 aircraft.
Aftermath
The rescue of Bat 21 was a watershed event for the military and led them to find a new approach to high-threat search and rescue. They recognized that, if a SAR mission was predestined to fail, it should not be attempted, and other options, such as special operations, diversionary tactics and other creative approaches tailored to the situation, had to be considered. Recognizing the need for an aircraft that could deliver better close air support, the Air Force accepted the Navy's A-7 Corsair. The military also improved the night capability of helicopters and area denial munitions.
Awards and recognition
John Van Etten (Nail 32) received the Distinguished Flying Cross for his part in this rescue. Jimmy D Kempton received the Distinguished Flying Cross for his BLU-52 suppression mission flown on 4 April, Hambleton received the Silver Star, the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Air Medal, the Meritorious Service Medal and a Purple Heart for his actions during this mission. For their heroic actions in rescuing Hambleton behind front lines, Thomas R. Norris was recommended for and received the Medal of Honor, although he initially declined to submit the paperwork.
Norris readily supported the nomination of Petty Officer Third Class Nguyen Van Kiet for the Navy Cross, the highest award that the Navy can give to a foreign national. Nguyen was the only South Vietnamese Naval member awarded the Navy Cross during the Vietnam War, and one of only two South Vietnamese to receive the award.
Navy investigators reviewed the action, interviewed participants, and recommended Norris for the Medal of Honor. He received it from President Gerald Ford in a White House ceremony on 6 March 1976 attended by Michael Thornton, another Navy SEAL who had saved Norris' life on 31 October 1972.
Hundreds of individuals from dozens of units from the Air Force, Army, Navy, Marines and Coast Guard assisted in Hambleton's rescue,and participants in the operation received a total of 234 individual medals.
In 1975, Clark's and Hambleton's rescue was declassified.
POW release and recovery of the dead
Astorga and Henderson were released in March 1973 during Operation Homecoming. The remains of the rest of the crew of Bat 21, Hambleton's EB-66E Destroyer, Bolte, Gatwood, Giannangeli, Levis and Serex, have not been recovered. The remains of Kulland, Frink and Paschall were recovered and returned to the United States in 1995, where they were buried at Arlington National Cemetery. The bodies of Potts and Walker have not been recovered to date.
The remains of the crew members of HH-53C Jolly Roger 67, Chapman, Call, Avery, Prater, Pearson and Alley, were returned to the United States on 1 October 1997. The six were honored on 19 November 1997 in a full military funeral at Arlington National Cemetery and a headstone commemorating all six airmen was placed at the site. Hambleton was unable to attend due to poor health, but a letter from him was read. He wrote, "They deserve all the accolades that we, the living, can bestow upon them. Again, I thank them, I honor them, and I will always hold great faith in my heart with them." Clark was present. He told the families of the downed fliers that "Each of you played a distinct role and forming the character of these men who so willingly paid a very dear price to help me get out of the jungles of Vietnam. You have my deepest sympathy—you and these six brave men." Advancements in DNA testing allowed the Department of Defense POW/Missing Personnel Office to identify individual remains and release them to their families for burial. Prater's remains were reburied on 19 June 2010. Avery's remains were reburied on 6 April 2012.
Later meeting
Fifteen years after the rescue, the USAF held a symposium at Nellis Air Force Base and invited all those directly involved. John Van Etten, whose call sign was Nail 32, had never met Hambleton in person. When he stepped on stage and put out his hand to Hambleton, he said, "Hello, Gene, I'm John Van Etten," and Gene replied, "No, you're not. ... you are Nail 32, I would recognize that voice anywhere!"
In popular culture
William C. Anderson wrote an article about the rescue in the August 1981 issue of Reader's Digest followed by the book Bat-21 in 1985. A second book, The Rescue of Bat 21 by Darrel D. Whitcomb was published in 1999 after considerable classified information was released, .
The Lt. Thomas R. Norris building at Naval Special Warfare Group Two in Little Creek, Virginia was named for Norris.
The film Bat*21, starring Gene Hackman as Hambleton, was a dramatized depiction of Hambleton's rescue, based on some of the actual events; Anderson assisted in the screenwriting of the film. Tom Norris' role in the rescue was still secret, and his actions were not depicted in the film.
The rescue was featured in the Vietnam episode of the television series Navy Seals: Untold Stories in 2001. It was featured in "Mysteries at the Museum" in the 2015 episode "Golfer Behind Enemy Lines." The monoculars used by Hambleton are displayed at the Museum of the United States Air Force in a Dayton, Ohio.

In the survivalist subculture or movement, a retreat is a place of refuge. Sometimes their retreats are called a bug-out location (BOL), a bunker, or a bolt hole. Survivalist retreats are intended to be self-sufficient and easily defended. Generally, they are located in sparsely populated outback rural areas.
History
While fallout shelters have been advocated since the 1950s, dedicated self-sufficient survivalist retreats have been advocated only since the mid-1970s. The survival retreat concept has been touted by a number of influential survivalist writers including Ragnar Benson, Robert K. Brown, Barton Biggs, Bruce D. Clayton, Jeff Cooper, Cresson Kearny, James Wesley Rawles, Howard Ruff, Kurt Saxon, Joel Skousen, Don Stephens, Mel Tappan, and Nancy Tappan. Survivalists or "preppers" build these survivalist retreats to help them survive in the event of a disaster or simply "disappear," hence, the need for self-sufficiency.
1960s
With the increasing inflation of the 1960s, the impending U.S. monetary devaluation, the continuing concern with possible nuclear exchanges between the US and the Soviet Union, and the increasing vulnerability of urban centers to supply shortages and other systems failures, a number of primarily conservative and libertarian thinkers began suggesting that individual preparations would be wise. This was further reinforced by the effort on the part of the U.S. government to encourage the installation of bomb and fallout shelters in the United States after the Cuban Missile Crisis. Harry Browne also began offering seminars in 1967 on how to survive a monetary collapse. He worked with Don Stephens, an architect, survival bookseller, and author, who provided input on how to build and equip a remote survival retreat. He provided a copy of his original Retreater's Bibliography (1967) for each seminar participant.
Articles on the subject appeared in such small-distribution libertarian publications as The Innovator and Atlantis Quarterly. It was also from this period that Robert D. Kephart began publishing Inflation Survival Letter (later renamed Personal Finance). The newsletter included a continuing section on personal preparedness by Stephens for several years. It promoted expensive seminars around the US on the same cautionary topics. Stephens participated, along with James McKeever and other defensive investing, hard currency advocates.
1970s
In 1975, Kurt Saxon began publishing a newsletter called The Survivor, which advocated moving to lightly populated regions to "lie low" during a socio-economic collapse, and setting up fortified enclaves for defense against what he termed "killer caravans" of looters from urban areas.
In 1976, Don Stephens popularized the term "retreater" and advocated relocating to a rural retreat when society breaks down.
Writers such as Howard Ruff warned about socio-economic collapse and recommended moving to lightly populated farming regions, most notably in his 1979 book How to Prosper During the Coming Bad Years, a best-seller in 1979.
For a time in the 1970s, the terms "survivalist" and "retreater" were used interchangeably. The term "retreater" eventually fell out of favor. This was attributed to the United States withdrawal from Vietnam, which led to the perception that the country was less at risk of being attacked. People began to become interested again as public paranoia intensified over the Soviet threat during Cold War period.
One of the most important newsletters on survivalism and survivalist retreats in the 1970s was the Personal Survival ("P.S.") Letter (c. 1977–1982) published by Mel Tappan, who also authored the books Survival Guns and Tappan on Survival. The newsletter included columns from Tappan, as well from Jeff Cooper, Al J. Venter, Bill Pier, Bruce D. Clayton, Rick Fines, Nancy Mack Tappan, J. B. Wood, Dr. Carl Kirsch, Charles Avery, Karl Hess, Eugene A. Barron, Janet Groene, Dean Ing, Bob Taylor, Reginald Bretnor, C. G. Cobb, and several other writers, some under pen names. The majority of this newsletter revolved around selecting, constructing and logistically equipping survival retreats. Following Tappan's death in 1980, Karl Hess took over publishing the newsletter, eventually renaming it Survival Tomorrow.
1980s
Survivalist retreat books of the 1980s were typified by the 1980 book Life After Doomsday by Bruce D. Clayton, advocating survival retreats in locales that would minimize fallout, as well as specially constructing blast shelters and/or fallout shelters that would provide protection in the event of a nuclear war.
1990s
Several books published in the 1990s offered advice on survival retreats and relocation. Some influential in survivalist circles are Survival Retreat: A Total Plan For Retreat Defense by Ragnar Benson, Strategic Relocation – North American Guide to Safe Places by Joel Skousen, and The Secure Home, (also by Skousen).
2000 to present
In recent years, advocacy of survivalist retreats has had a strong resurgence after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City in 2001, the 2002 attacks and 2005 attacks in Bali, the 2004 Madrid train bombings in Spain, and the 2005 public transportation bombings in London.
Several books published since 2000 advocate survival retreats and relocation. Some that have been particularly influential in survivalist circles are How to Implement a High Security Shelter in the Home by Joel Skousen, Rawles on Retreats and Relocation by James Wesley Rawles, and Life After Terrorism: What You Need to Know to Survive in Today's World by Bruce D. Clayton.
Economic troubles emerging from the credit collapse triggered by the 2007 U.S. subprime mortgage crisis have prompted a wider cross-section of the populace to modify their homes as well as establish dedicated survival retreats. James Wesley Rawles, the editor of SurvivalBlog was quoted by the New York Times in April 2008 that "interest in the survivalist movement 'is experiencing its largest growth since the late 1970s'”. He also stated that his blog's conservative core readership has been supplemented with "an increasing number of stridently green and left-of-center readers."
Necessity for retreats
Mel Tappan was quoted by then AP correspondent Peter Arnett that: "The concept most fundamental to long term disaster preparedness, in retreating, is having a safe place to go to avoid the concentrated violence destined to erupt in the cities."
Common retreat locale parameters
Common retreat locale selection parameters include light population density, plentiful water, arable land, good solar exposure for gardening and photovoltaics, situation above any flood plains, and a diverse and healthy local economy. Fearing rioting, looting and other unrest, many survivalists advocate selecting retreat locales that are more than one tank of gasoline away from any major metropolitan region. Properties that are not in "channelized areas" or on anticipated "refugee lines of drift" are also touted.
One of the key goals of retreats is to be self-sufficient for the duration of societal collapse. To that end, plentiful water and arable soil are paramount considerations. Beyond that, a priority is situation on isolated, defensible terrain. Typically, retreats do not want their habitations or structures jeopardized by being within line of sight of any major highway.
Because of its low population density and diverse economy, James Wesley Rawles and Joel Skousen both recommend the Intermountain West region of the United States as a preferred region for relocation and setting up retreats. Although it has higher population density, Mel Tappan recommended southwestern Oregon, where he lived, primarily because it is not downwind of any envisioned nuclear targets in the United States.
Mel Tappan was disappointed by the demographics of southwestern Oregon after the survivalist influx of the late 1970s. "Too many doctors and lawyers" relocated to Oregon, and "not enough plumbers, electricians, or carpenters."
Evacuation to a retreat
While some survivalists recommend living at a rural retreat year-round, most survivalists cannot afford to do so. Therefore, they rely on keeping a well-stocked retreat, and plan to go there "at the 11th hour", as necessary. They keep a bug-out bag handy, and may have a dedicated bug-out vehicle (BOV). This is a vehicle that the owner keeps prepared in the event of the need for an emergency evacuation. Typically a BOV is equipped with a variation on the bug-out bag that includes additional automotive supplies, clothing, food, and water. Survivalists tend to favor ATV/Off-road vehicles in particular such as four wheel drive, pickup trucks, SUVs and motorbikes such as Streetfighters, Enduros/Supermotos etc due to their greater off-road/handling abilities. Survivalists may opt into maintaining an older vehicle as they most likely lack critical electronic components that could be damaged by the electromagnetic pulse that accompanies a nuclear explosion.
Retreat organization
Most survivalist retreats are created by individuals and their families, but larger "group retreats" or "covenant communities" are formed along the lines of an intentional community.
Retreat architecture and security
Jeff Cooper popularized the concept of hardening retreats against small arms fire. In an article entitled "Notes on Tactical Residential Architecture" in Issue #30 of P.S. Letter (April, 1982), Cooper suggested using the "Vauban Principle", whereby projecting bastion corners would prevent miscreants from being able to approach a retreat's exterior walls in any blind spots. Corners with this simplified implementation of a Vauban Star are now called "Cooper Corners" by James Wesley Rawles, in honor of Jeff Cooper. Depending on the size of the group needing shelter, design elements of traditional European castle architecture, as well as Chinese Fujian Tulou and Mexican walled courtyard houses have been suggested for survival retreats.
In both his book Rawles on Retreats and Relocation and in his survivalist novel, Patriots: A Novel of Survival in the Coming Collapse, Rawles describes in great detail retreat groups "upgrading" brick or other masonry houses to that of a blockhouse with steel reinforced window shutters and doors, excavating anti-vehicular ditches, installing warded gate locks, constructing concertina wire obstacles, and fougasses, and setting up listening post/observation posts (LP/OPs.) Rawles is a proponent of including a mantrap foyer at survival retreats, an architectural element that he calls a "crushroom".
Both Bruce D. Clayton and Joel Skousen have written extensively on integrating fallout shelters into retreat homes, but they put less emphasis on ballistic protection and exterior perimeter security than Cooper and Rawles.
Retreat logistics
Anticipating long periods of time without commerce in the future, as well as observing documented history, retreat groups typically place a strong emphasis on logistics. They amass stockpiles of supplies for their own use, for charity, and for barter. Frequently cited key logistics for a retreat include long-term storage food, common caliber ammunition, medical supplies, tools, gardening seed, and fuel. In an article entitled "Ballistic Wampum" in Issue #6 of P.S. Letter (1979) Jeff Cooper wrote about stockpiling ammunition far in excess of his own needs, keeping the extra available to use for bartering.
In their books, Joel Skousen, Mel Tappan, and Howard Ruff all emphasize the need to have a one-year supply of storage food.
Mainstream economist and financial adviser Barton Biggs is a proponent of well-stocked retreats. In his 2008 book Wealth, War, and Wisdom, Biggs has a gloomy outlook for the economic future, and suggests that investors take survivalist measures. In the book, Biggs recommends that his readers should “assume the possibility of a breakdown of the civilized infrastructure.” He goes so far as to recommend setting up survival retreats: “Your safe haven must be self-sufficient and capable of growing some kind of food,” Mr. Biggs writes. “It should be well-stocked with seed, fertilizer, canned food, wine, medicine, clothes, etc. Think Swiss Family Robinson. Even in America and Europe there could be moments of riot and rebellion when law and order temporarily breaks down.”
Survivalist retreats worldwide
Survivalist retreats, both formal and informal exist worldwide, most visibly in Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany (often organized under the guise of "adventuresport" clubs), New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, and the United States.
Government operated retreats
Construction of government-built retreats, security compounds and underground shelters—roughly analogous to survivalist retreats—has been done extensively since the advent of the Cold War, especially of public nuclear fallout shelters in many nations. The United States government has created Continuity of Government (COG) shelters built by the Department of Defense and Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA"). These include the massive shelter built under the Greenbrier hotel (aka Project Greek Island), military facilities such as Cheyenne Mountain Complex, and the Raven Rock Mountain Complex, and Mount Weather sites. Facilities in other nations include the Swiss redoubt fortress system and its dual use facilities such as the Sonnenberg Tunnel and Norway's Sentralanlegget bunker in Buskerud County.

A ricasso is an unsharpened length of blade just above the guard or handle on a knife, dagger, sword, or bayonet. Blades designed this way appear at many periods in history in many parts of the world and date back to at least the Bronze Age—essentially, as long as humans have shaped cutting tools from metals.
There were many reasons to make a blade with a ricasso, and in Europe, later longswords, claymores, rapiers, and other lengthy swords often had this feature. One very simple influence presently and historically is fashion, which may answer this question for blades whose presence or absence of a ricasso has no effect on how it is used. Leaving a ricasso can also save the blade maker's time—a section of blade that would not be used given the purpose of the piece does not have to be shaped and sharpened. In many cases, however, they are quite functional.
Historically, ricassos were commonly present on medieval and early Renaissance swords. The basic function was to allow the wielder to place their index finger above the crossguard, which potentially allowed for greater grip strength and torque. This technique was a factor in the evolution of compound hilts, which are iconic of rapiers and other Renaissance swords, as the compound hilt allows a ricasso grip while still protecting the hand.
Some of the best-known historic examples of ricassos are on large European swords used with two hands. When used aggressively with adequate space to build up swinging momentum, the weapon would be held at the end of the grip for the best reach and power. Some experts on historical combat believe that this technique of sustained blade swinging was used as a tactic for swordsmen to penetrate pike formations. However, once the pike line was broken, the swordsman then used the ricasso on his sword to shorten his grip, allowing the sword to be more effectively manoeuvred in the tight press within the enemy ranks as well as offering more leverage and ability to thrust. The ricassos of two-handed swords often have a second, smaller set of quillons past the ricasso, effectively creating a secondary grip. This technique is very similar to the half-sword technique, which involves gripping the sharpened midsection of the blade to turn the blade into a sort of lever weapon. It is possible even without gauntlets to hold a sharpened blade relatively safely, with proper technique.
Today, many knives seen outside of the kitchen include a bevel section, though the term is seldom used. These ricassos may serve purely decorative purposes; may offer greater blade strength at a high-stress point, or may be intended to be gripped to provide greater control when performing precise cutting.
A sub-hilt (an additional section of guard located along the length of the grip of a blade, rather than up the blade as with a fluke), is a related feature sometimes found on knives instead of a ricasso. Depending on design, it can offer many of the same advantages in versatility but makes the choked up grip more comfortable. Some blades may have both a sub-hilt and a ricasso, thus offering two possible forward grip positions.

The Robertson Quarry Galamander is a rare surviving example of a specialized stone-hauling vehicle. It is located in a small public park on the east side of Maine State Route 182 at its junction with Grist Mill Road in Franklin, Maine. It is the only known surviving intact example of the form, which was used widely in Maine's granite quarries. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1992.
Description and history
The galamander is a wagon-like conveyance, about 18 feet (5.5 m) long and 6 feet (1.8 m) wide. It has four wooden spoked wheels, the rear pair 6 feet (1.8 m) in diameter and the front ones 4 feet (1.2 m). The wheels have iron hubs and the wearing surface is also finished in iron. The "frame" of the wagon is a single large wooden beam, to which the rear axle assembly and a front swivel mount for the front axle are attached. A simple seat with a metal spring is fastened above the front axle, and a derrick consisting of a single tapered beam is attached to a swivel mount above the rear axle. The derrick was used (in conjunction with a block and tackle) to raise slabs of stone onto and off the galamander. The wagon is braked by friction pads on the rear wheels which are activated by a lever controlled by the driver. The galamander would have been drawn by a team of horses or oxen. It is presently set in a display configuration under a gable-roofed shelter in a small municipal park, along with interpretive panels explaining its historical use.
This galamander is one of only two known to survive from Maine's quarries. The other, the Vinalhaven Galamander in Vinalhaven, Maine, is a 1960s reconstruction of one that was deemed in too poor condition to restore completely. The exact origin of the galamander's creation is not known, but they were in common use in Maine's mid-coastal granite quarries from the late 19th century into the early 20th century, with one historian crediting their development to Rev. W. H. Littlefield of Vinalhaven. This galamander was recovered from a local quarry in 1965.

The Ronchamp colliery shafts (French, Les puits des houillères de Ronchamp) are a series of collieries undertaken by the various mining companies in the Ronchamp coalfield between the early 19th and mid-20th centuries at Ronchamp, Champagney, and Magny-Danigon, in the Haute-Saône département of France.
History
From 1760 to 1810, coal was extracted by galleries and bures. From 1810 to 1900, twenty-six increasingly deep shafts were dug. In 1950, the twenty-seventh was dug in the Etançon forest. Two of these belonged to the independent Mourière concession, which also dug on a geologically different deposit from the one at Ronchamp. The Société civile des houillères de Ronchamp (SCHR) dug France's deepest shaft twice in succession: the Magny shaft (694 meters) in 1878 and the Arthur de Buyer shaft (1,010 meters) in 1900.
Background
The Ronchamp coalfields were officially discovered in the mid-18th century in the woods above the villages of Ronchamp and Champagney. Two concessions were granted in 1757: that of the Lords of Ronchamp for the commune of Ronchamp, and that of the Prince-Abbots of Lure for Champagney. These were subsequently merged to form a single concession in 1763.
Another concession was granted in 1766 to the Prince of Bauffremont at Mourière, a hamlet to the northwest of the coalfield. However, he did not exploit the coal, and it was not until 1844 that Monsieur Grézely fils, in partnership with Messieurs Conrad et consorts, began mining coal, which he continued until 1891, after a change of ownership in 1872.
The Compagnie des maîtres de forge was founded in 1847, and in 1862 obtained a concession to the south of the Ronchamp mining concession. But both companies had spent their money to obtain the Éboulet concession and were forced to merge in 1866. In 1919, the société civile des houillères de Ronchamp changed its legal form to become a société anonyme. When the French coal industry was nationalized in 1946, Électricité de France (EDF) became the owner of the mine until the last shaft was closed in 1958. The concession was relinquished in 1961.
The various shafts sunk in the coalfield are increasingly deep due to the inclined slope of the coal beds. Most shafts are used for coal extraction, but they can also be used for other purposes, such as ventilation, dewatering, or service.
Life of the 27 shafts
The shafts are colored according to their respective concessions: darker shades indicate periods of coal extraction, and lighter shades indicate other functions or mothballing.
Saint-Louis shaft
47.706895°N 6.653493°E﻿ / 47.706895; 6.653493﻿ (Puits Saint-Louis)
The Saint-Louis shaft was the first true mine shaft sunk in the coalfield, south of the hamlet of La Houillère. The shaft was the site of the basin's first firedamp explosion, which occurred on April 10, 1824; it killed 20 people and injured 16 others. Later, on May 31, 1830, a second and even more deadly firedamp explosion killed 28 people. The pit was abandoned and backfilled in 1842. After closure, one of the buildings was preserved as a casino and ballroom before being demolished in the 1960s. At the beginning of the 21st century, almost no trace of the installations remains, and the shaft is located under a pavilion at the foot of a hill. A decorative monument built in 2012 recalls the site's mining past.
Henri IV shaft
47.708993°N 6.654105°E﻿ / 47.708993; 6.654105﻿ (Puits Henri IV)
Shaft sinking began in 1815. In October 1816, it reached the first layer at a depth of 21 meters and a thickness of 1.30 meters. It is used to draw water from the lower workings and discharge it at the level of the large drainage channel; the water is removed from the galleries by hand pumps and then brought to light by ox-driven pumps. These pumps operate at a rate of twelve to fifteen pulses per minute, with a flow rate of 1.5 liters per piston stroke. Finally, other hand pumps were used to convey water to the gully.
On May 12, 1823, he crossed the second layer some twenty meters below the first. This layer is 1.6 meters thick, including 0.3 meters of sterile rock. It is mined by the Cantine and Carrière galleries, despite a limited mining area. On June 15, 1830, the Henri IV shaft reached a depth of 61 meters. It serves as an air return for the Saint-Louis shaft. In 1830, production at the latter was 7,200 tons, with a workforce of 35 miners and 29 laborers.
In 1833, just as the second layer was about to be exhausted at the Henri IV and Saint-Antoine wells, a third vein (a schistose and pyritic vein), 1.80 meters thick, was mined. Work was abandoned in 1835. During the Etançon disaster in December 1950, this shaft and the Petit-Pierre shaft reopened under water pressure. A plum tree was completely swallowed up in the hole formed by the Henri IV well. Both shafts were backfilled with shalek.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the well was located in the courtyard of a house.
Samson shaft
47.708116°N 6.64646°E﻿ / 47.708116; 6.64646﻿ (Puits Samson)
The location of the shaft was chosen to the west of the Basvent gallery (located in the hamlet of La Houillère) and 140 meters southwest of the orifice of the large drainage channel. Sinking of the shaft began on October 1, 1822 in the Etançon valley. It was stopped at a depth of 17 meters due to a heavy influx of water, requiring 225 to 250 60-liter water skips to be hauled up every 24 hours, representing a flow rate of 13.8 m3 per day. The well is 3.6 meters long and 1.6 meters wide and is equipped with ladders. When abandoned, the well cost 200 francs per meter dug. Sinking resumed in April 1824 and the first layer reached 18.66 meters. The shaft was stopped at a depth of 19 meters and abandoned the same year due to the poor quality of the coal and the influx of water. In fact, the shaft fell on an uplift in the ground that compressed the two layers of coal to the point of bringing them almost into contact and flattening them.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the well site was invaded by the Fourchie pond, fed by the large drainage channel. A house built on the site was also invaded but later destroyed by fire in the 1930s. The ruins remained until the 1970s. In 1952, the Samson shaft (a gallery built from the surface) was dug not far from the old well, bypassing the old drowned workings. At the beginning of the 21st century, the shaft was located in a swamp not far from the outcrop mining circuit.
Shaft no. 1
47.707906°N 6.670284°E﻿ / 47.707906; 6.670284﻿ (Puits n° 1)
Sinking of the shaft began in June 1825 at "La Bouverie", at the foot of the Chevanel wood, which had long been mined by drifting. Digging was subcontracted to the d'Andlau company, with the workers supplying the powder and oil. The upper section is lined with a 15-meter-high casing. The average depth is 6 meters per month. The workers are also responsible for tool maintenance and frame installation. At a depth of 149 meters, they encounter a 2.25-metre vein encased in a 0.35-metre layer of sandstone. A 12-horsepower steam engine is installed for extraction. The coal is transported in 400 kg Anzin-model carts on a rail track.
Between 1828 and 1830, production at the shaft rose from 6,000 to 12,000 tonnes a year, and the workforce grew from 36 miners and 40 laborers to 64 miners and 54 laborers. In 1831, the wagons were loaded onto trays and brought to daylight. It was at this time that an extraction cage was first used in a shaft at the Ronchamp mines. In the same year, the shaft was deepened by 24 meters, and a 320-meter-long research gallery was sunk to the east, but to no avail. In 1833, the strangulation of the coal seams put an end to mining. At the beginning of the 21st century, the shaft was a four-meter-diameter water hole at the edge of the Paris-Basel railway line.
Shaft no. 2
47.705328°N 6.662416°E﻿ / 47.705328; 6.662416﻿ (Puits n° 2)
The shaft was sunk in June 1825 towards the Rahin river and received a casing with a picot casing over 21 meters. At a depth of 116 meters, it encountered carbonaceous schists. Some reconnaissance work was carried out, with little result. The cuttings were hauled up by a horse-drawn baritel, later replaced by the steam engine at the Saint-Louis shaft. Shaft digging was stopped at a depth of 126.6 meters.
In November 1828, a 120-meter-long research gallery was dug in the up-dip area, but to no avail. In November 1829, a travers-banc in the down-dip part of the work was also cancelled. Later, in a westerly direction, a number of cuttings were installed. Between 1828 and 1830, production at the shaft rose from 0 to 180 tonnes a year, and the workforce increased from 8 miners and 4 labourers to 12 miners and 10 labourers. In 1833, research was carried out, but was abandoned, showing that the shaft had been dug on an uplift in the coalfield. It was decided to abandon the shaft. The installation of a 70 hp steam engine, initially envisaged, was canceled due to high costs.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the well site was located at the foot of the hills overlooking the communes of Ronchamp and Champagney.
Shaft no. 3
47.713041°N 6.662915°E﻿ / 47.713041; 6.662915﻿ (Puits No. 3)
Sinking of shaft no. 3 began at the end of 1825, north of the large drainage channel, in the ground where there was still a lot of coal. It reached a depth of 38.5 meters and tapped the upper part of the Galerie du Cheval, as well as the downstream parts of the Grande Rigole. It is served by a horse-drawn arena. The area is notoriously unstable, with dozens of mine quarters collapsing between 1811 and 1813. Shaft no. 3 was abandoned in August 1828 after producing 9,000 tons of coal with a workforce of 54 miners and 60 laborers.
Shaft no. 4
47.711306°N 6.665579°E﻿ / 47.711306; 6.665579﻿ (Puits n° 4)
Sinking of the shaft began in April 1829 on the advice of a master miner 90 meters south of shaft no. 3, in an area where a 1,700 m3 panel existed between the eastern part of the Cheval works and the large drainage channel. In 1830, the shaft produced 2,880 tons of coal with a workforce of 8 miners and 60 laborers. Served by a baritel, it was backfilled around 1840. At the beginning of the 21st century, shaft no. 4 was a small funnel-shaped subsidence in the forest close to a road.
Shaft no. 5
47.700259°N 6.671484°E﻿ / 47.700259; 6.671484﻿ (Puits No. 5)
Sinking of the shaft began on May 20, 1830, on the advice of Thirria, an engineer from Vesoul, who had planned to sink the shaft 1,200 meters south of shaft no. 1 (not far from the future Sainte-Pauline and Sainte-Barbe shafts), but the mining company decided to sink it only 800 meters from the latter. The shaft is rectangular in cross-section, measuring 2.75 × 2.26 meters, with three compartments: one for extraction (2.26 × 1.54 meters), one for ladders (2.26 × 0.8 meters) and one for ventilation (2.26 × 0.4 meters). The first casing kit is installed at a depth of nine meters.
In March 1831, the casing was extended to a depth of 31 meters with a spiked casing, and in October the shaft reached a depth of 52 meters. At the end of 1831, the sinking of shaft no. 5 was suspended due to a lack of funding. Sinking was finally resumed in March 1832, only to stop again in May 1832 at a depth of 36.8 meters to drill a hole at the bottom of the shaft, which reached 50 meters on July 5. At 130 meters from the surface, he encountered coal-bearing soil, but no trace of coal. This shallow depth suggested a ground uplift. No coal was extracted, and the shaft was abandoned.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the well is a water hole in the Époisses wood.
Shaft no. 6
47.707018°N 6.644486°E﻿ / 47.707018; 6.644486﻿ (Puits No. 6)
Sinking of the shaft began on August 1, 1832, 190 meters south-west of the Samson shaft, abandoned eight years earlier. The coalfield is encountered at 44 meters and the first layer at 56 meters, which is almost a metre thick, but blocked by shale coal. At 59 meters, a second layer 2.70 meters thick was discovered, but it was cut by a 40-centimeter shale bed. The shaft was stopped at 66 meters from the surface.
The shaft fell at the top of an uplift, as the rocks are highly faulted and the coalfield is 36.9 meters high on the north face of the shaft, compared with 24.9 meters on the south face. A gallery was dug to the west, but the coal is pyritic, so it was abandoned after 250 meters. In April 1834, a hole drilled 35 meters west of the shaft found a third layer, but this was unworkable. In 1836, mining was stopped. In 1839, a communication gallery was established with shaft no. 7, which was equipped with a ventilation shaft from 1847.
In 1840, the shaft was drowned when the concession was abandoned. In 1842, the new owners, who had just acquired the concession, hoped that coal might still exist from the plans and engineer's reports. They decided to dewater the shaft and investigate, but to no avail. Shaft no. 6 was still used as a natural ventilation shaft at Saint-Charles between 1850 and 1855.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the well is located in the garden of a house that once housed the well's caretaker.
Shaft no. 7
47.705729°N 6.64406°E﻿ / 47.705729; 6.64406﻿ (Puits No. 7)
The shaft was sunk on July 15, 1839, 150 meters south of shaft no. 6, with the aim of finding coal beyond the uplift encountered by its predecessor. But on September 25, 1840, work stopped at 94.70 meters in the red sandstone. A 20-meter borehole at the bottom of the shaft still revealed the presence of red sandstone. By the end of July 1841, 115 meters of red sandstone had been traversed, but work was halted when the company was put up for sale.
On June 14, 1842, the concession was bought back, and on July 20, 1842, the company's new engineer, Schutz, encouraged the owners to resume work on the shaft in view of the positive results of the Ronchamp borehole (or borehole X). On September 5, 1842, work resumed at shaft no. 7. Finally, in April 1843, the shaft traversed the coalfield at 150.73 meters, followed by a 1.75-meter layer of coal at 168.68 meters. On June 8, the second layer of coal was encountered. In November 1843, the shaft encountered a 2.80-metre coal seam at a depth of 180 meters. After the installation of the steam engine in the Saint-Louis shaft, mining finally began. There were 347 workers in 1847.
In 1848, a junction with the Saint-Charles shaft was established, and ventilation took place naturally, but in 1853 it had to be reinforced with a toc-feu. Mining was subsequently abandoned, but the shaft continued to be maintained, becoming the ventilation shaft for the Saint-Charles shaft in 1854. On December 15, 1858, a Lemielle ventilator with a 2.36-meter-diameter hexagonal casing and rotating blades was installed to improve ventilation. It is capable of drawing in 15 m3 of air per second, with a rotation speed of 28 revolutions per minute, powered by a 15-horsepower steam engine. It creates three different air currents for better ventilation of the mine workings. The fan was repaired and refurbished in 1863. In 1872, the shaft was closed due to a collapse of the walls, so it was backfilled and the fan was scrapped. In 1958, a concrete slab was poured at the level of its opening.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the secured well was located between two houses in rue du puits VII.
Saint-Charles shaft no. 8
47.702928°N 6.648911°E﻿ / 47.702928; 6.648911﻿ (Puits Saint-Charles)
In the second half of the 19th century, the Saint-Charles shaft was open for more than fifty years, longer than most of the other open pits in Ronchamp. It has also experienced fires and firedamp blasts. The shaft is distinguished by its extraction system using a cleat machine. This process, too complex, was eventually abandoned following technical setbacks. After closure, the pit buildings were converted into housing; the slag heaps were even re-used between the wars, as they were still rich in coal. At the end of the twentieth century, these same slag heaps burst into flames.
de-la-Croix shaft
47.719507°N 6.604159°E﻿ / 47.719507; 6.604159﻿ (Puits de-la-Croix)
This rectangular shaft was commissioned by the Mourière company on October 23, 1849. It was dug using a manual lathe driven by three workers, working day and night. Gunpowder was used for the first time on November 14, 1849. On the following August 24, the company decided to replace the lathe with a baritel. After traversing 25 meters of sandstone, the shaft reaches the coalfield containing pyritic shale. The shaft encounters coal veinlets at depths of 40 and 50 meters. The first mineable coal seam is encountered at 87 meters, 2.2 meters thick but interspersed with shale and pyrite. At 98.5 meters, another layer 0.8 meters thick was discovered. The shaft is then connected to the culotte gallery, which mines the same vein.
On January 7, 1851, the well was flooded by 1,500 liters of water per hour. The Saint-Louis gallery was undertaken to dewater it but failed. Despite this, the sinking was completed on July 14. The shaft is connected to the Culot gallery by a large ascending gallery. Two layers of coal a few tens of centimeters thick are mined with a 15 hp steam engine. The coal had to be washed, as it contained iron pyrite and clay. Work was suspended seven years later following the accidental death of the mining engineer. In 1872, a new company was created and work resumed. Coal production fell from 1,001 tonnes in 1879 to 588 tonnes in 1880. In 1891, the winding-up of the company put an end to operations at the de-la-Croix shaft.
At the beginning of the 21st century, a five-meter-diameter funnel remains, regularly filled with water.
Saint-Joseph shaft
47.696834°N 6.647587°E﻿ / 47.696834; 6.647587﻿ (Puits Saint-Joseph)
The Saint Joseph pit was the center of activity for the Ronchamp company, with the installation of a coking plant and a coal-washing plant, before being replaced by the Chanois shaft. On August 10, 1859, a firedamp explosion killed 29 people. On May 8, 1860, another explosion destroyed the underground galleries and the roof of the surface revenue building. After the closure of the Saint-Joseph shaft in 1895, the buildings were razed to the ground and replaced by a small sawmill, whose buildings, now used as warehouses for building materials, still exist at the beginning of the 21st century.
Notre-Dame Shaft
47.690047°N 6.648059°E﻿ / 47.690047; 6.648059﻿ (Puits Notre-Dame)
The Notre-Dame shaft was dug by a rival company, the Société des maîtres de forges owning the Éboulet mines, from 1851 before being integrated into the Ronchamp collieries fifteen years later. After being used to extract coal for half a century, it was then used as a water pumping shaft until the mines closed in 1958. The concrete slabs obstructing the shafts still stand at the beginning of the 21st century.
Saint-Jean shaft
47.694187°N 6.669999°E﻿ / 47.694187; 6.669999﻿ (Puits Saint-Jean)
Sinking of the shaft began on May 21, 1854. Rectangular in cross-section, measuring 5 by 2.50 meters, it was cased for 34.11 meters, but the casing allowed some of the water to pass through; it was then extended to the bottom at 51.4 meters. Water flow is 800 liters per hour. Specific machines were used to drain it. On January 9, 1856, the well was abandoned due to its exorbitant cost of 168,719.12 francs and because it duplicated the Sainte-Pauline well. In 1867, five houses were built near the well. The well was finally backfilled on February 8, 1873. At the beginning of the 21st century, the well was located in a garden in the cité Saint-Jean.
Sainte-Pauline shaft
47.692949°N 6.660563°E﻿ / 47.692949; 6.660563﻿ (Puits Sainte-Pauline)
The shaft was sunk from 1854 onwards, and coal was mined between 1861 and 1884, before the pit was backfilled. In the 1870s, a mining town, a phalanstery and a Catholic chapel were built in the immediate vicinity of the mine. At the beginning of the 21st century, the shaft was a funnel just a few meters from Route Nationale. The mining settlement, the phalanstery and the slag heap (where a horse riding arena is located) also survive.
Sainte-Barbe shaft
47.698208°N 6.658240°E﻿ / 47.698208; 6.658240﻿ (Puits Sainte-Barbe)
The Sainte-Barbe shaft is located near the Champagney ballastières. Sunk from 1854, it mined coal from 1860 to 1872 and was used to ventilate the Sainte-Pauline shaft from 1869 to 1884, before being backfilled. In the second half of the 20th century, the well site was used as a sand pit, and a short-lived equestrian center existed at the beginning of the 21st century. A sign installed in 2017 explains the history of the Sainte-Pauline and Sainte-Barbe wells.
l'Espérance shaft
47.688698°N 6.657640°E﻿ / 47.688698; 6.657640﻿ (Puits de l'Espérance)
The shaft was sunk on December 16, 1855, against a backdrop of competition for a concession extension. As the competing Éboulet company had already obtained the land sought by the Société des houillères de Ronchamp, the shaft was sunk in a marshy area some twenty meters from a stream called Le Beuveroux. It has a rectangular cross-section of 5 by 2.50 meters, with three compartments: one for extraction, another for ladders, and the last for pumps and air tanks. On January 15, 1856, it was 4 meters deep. The water was pumped out by hand pumps driven by four men working hourly shifts. On February 20, the 10-horsepower steam engine for the Saint-Jean well was installed. On June 5, sinking resumed. On July 15, at a depth of 9 meters, an 11-metre-high casing was laid and three dewatering pumps installed. On April 30, 1857, at a depth of 35 meters, a new casing was installed under the first. The cost of sinking was 3,000 francs per meter dug and cased.
On February 1, 1858, the shaft reached a depth of 80 meters, and since sinking was in compact sandstone, walling was no longer necessary. On the following August 1st, sinking was stopped at a depth of 103.4 meters when the company learned that the Chatelaie borehole (undertaken in the same sector by a rival company, the Société des Ingénieurs) had descended to a depth of 600 meters without encountering any coal. On February 8, 1873, the shaft was officially abandoned at the same time as the Saint-Jean shaft; it was simply surrounded by a barbed-wire fence and backfilled with bundles of wood. In 1958, it was backfilled at the behest of the Champagney town council for safety reasons, and a concrete slab was finally poured.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the well was under a high-voltage power line (linking the Ronchamp substation to Belfort) in a marshland crossed by the Beuveroux.
Sainte-Marie shaft
47.703076°N 6.630099°E﻿ / 47.703076; 6.630099﻿ (Puits Sainte-Marie)
The Sainte-Marie shaft saw very irregular activity between 1866 and 1958. The reinforced concrete headframe dates from 1924. Since March 29, 2001, the headframe, the last surviving architectural reminder of the Ronchamp coal mines, has been listed as a historical monument with the xxe siècle label.
Saint-Georges shaft
47.687666°N 6.667103°E﻿ / 47.687666; 6.667103﻿ (Puits Saint-Georges)
In 1864, Ronchamp collieries began sinking the Sainte-Marie shaft to the west of the mined basin and planned to sink another shaft to the east. Sinking began on July 10, 1866. A steam engine drives the Saint-Georges shaft, which has a circular cross-section with a diameter of 3.75 meters, and a brick partition separates the extraction and ventilation compartments. It is equipped with a 26.80-meter wooden casing, topped by a five-meter concrete reinforcement. This is the first circular shaft in the Ronchamp mining basin to be walled in over its entire height.
On January 8, 1868, the coalfield was encountered at 440 meters, with a first bed of 60 centimeters of coal at a depth of 447 meters and a second of 35 centimeters at 453 meters. These results were due to ground uplift. In 1869, the ventilator of the Saint-Charles shaft was installed on the pit floor to provide better ventilation for the research work undertaken at the bottom of the mine. In June 1871, a long drift was driven into the small coalbeds encountered to the south-west. However, the work encountered an uplift 200 meters from the shaft. This was crossed by a rock gallery. It was in this gallery that dynamite was used at the bottom of a mine for the first time in France. These were comparative tests with gunpowder. In March 1873, work was suspended.
In 1881, after having been abandoned for ten years, the company considered using the Saint-Georges shaft to replace the Sainte-Pauline, Sainte-Barbe and Notre-Dame shafts; the engineers were thinking of linking it to the Tonnet shaft then under construction. In the end, however, the investment would be too unprofitable. The Magny shaft to the south of the coalfield was producing better results. In 1958, a concrete slab topped by a bollard was poured. At the beginning of the 21st century, the Saint-Georges well was located on the side of a Chemin.
Saint-Paul shaft
47.710150°N 6.610006°E﻿ / 47.710150; 6.610006﻿ (Puits Saint-Paul)
This exploratory well was started by the Mourière company on September 1, 1873, in the sandstone 1,100 meters southeast of the de-la-Croix shaft. It has a diameter of 3.5 meters. The coalfield is encountered 158 meters below the surface, but the shaft is subsequently deepened to 250 meters. Several exploratory drifts were driven northwards for 200 meters and southwards for over 300 meters. But no mineable coal was found at the bottom of the Saint-Paul shaft.
The steam engine used for extraction is powered by coal extracted from the workings installed in the Renaissance galleries. An unguided bucket is used to lower and raise equipment and men. Some twenty workers were employed on the Saint-Paul shaft. The shaft was finally abandoned and backfilled in 1882. At the beginning of the 21st century, the Saint-Paul shaft is a funnel filled with waste.
Chanois shaft
47.693339°N 6.629723°E﻿ / 47.693339; 6.629723﻿ (Puits du Chanois)
The Chanois pit was the center of Ronchamp's coal mining operations from the end of the 19th century until the mines closed in 1958. It was therefore chosen as the site for the coal mine's ancillary facilities, including a coal washing plant, a coking plant and a thermal power station, succeeding the Saint-Joseph shaft. At the beginning of the 21st century, many remnants of these facilities remain.
Magny shaft
47.687648°N 6.633452°E﻿ / 47.687648; 6.633452﻿ (Puits du Magny)
The Magny shaft is 694 meters deep, making it the deepest mine shaft in France when it was commissioned in 1878. It is also the Ronchamp shaft with the longest period of operation, at 80 years. This long period of mining was interspersed with several periods of service, the longest lasting a decade. It was from this shaft that the last coal train in the coalfield was hauled up on Saturday, May 3, 1958. At the beginning of the 21st century, a few more or less well-preserved buildings remain, including the former administration building.
Tonnet shaft / no 9
47.683661°N 6.659464°E﻿ / 47.683661; 6.659464﻿ (Puits du Tonnet)
On June 14, 1881, the Board of Directors decided to dig a new extraction shaft south of Sainte-Pauline. The plan was for this new No. 9 shaft to be connected to the Saint-Georges shaft, which would be equipped for ventilation and extraction if necessary. Sinking of the shaft began in 1883, south of the Espérance shaft and 700 meters from the Saint-Georges shaft. The shaft has a diameter of 3.4 meters. It is fully walled and has a ventilation compartment. A first casing is installed from the surface, followed by a second at a depth of 35 meters. The water supply at this depth is 250 m3 per day. In 1884, at a depth of 518 meters, a new water supply required the installation of a reservoir at the bottom of the shaft and pumps at the surface. In 1885, a miner was killed by a falling object.
The following year, the shaft was sunk at a rate of 17 meters per month, and the first layer of coal was encountered at a depth of 558 meters. It was 60 centimeters thick, interspersed with five shale beds. The shaft is deepened to 574 meters, where a research gallery is dug to the south. Ten meters further down, a second gallery was created for ventilation. Research continued for two years. The miners now encounter only patchy benches. Mining ceased definitively at the Tonnet shaft on June 8, 1888.
In 1950, during the period of reconstruction, the company considered relaunching mining operations at the Notre-Dame and Tonnet shafts. But this would require rehabilitating 700 meters of track and fitting out the Tonnet shaft for extraction, at an estimated cost of one billion francs. In 1954, the defense committee called for resumption of mining at the Tonnet shaft, arguing that the shaft column was in good condition and that engineers such as Dumay, Egerman and Poussigue had estimated coal reserves of 500,000 tonnes. Research carried out by drifting at the bottom of the mine and by drilling in the Champagney plain showed that this region of the mining basin contained exploitable layers that had remained unexploited. Four years later, the ruins of the buildings were demolished. The shaft was backfilled with shale and a concrete slab topped by a bollard was poured.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the concrete slab of the well, topped by its milestone, still stands atop a small butte. These remains are part of the "Les étangs du Chérimont" walking trail created by the Communauté de communes Rahin et Chérimont. There are also a few remains of broken bricks, a small slag heap, a powder magazine and the old coal-mining railroad line that ran close to the pit.
Shaft no. 10
47.705419°N 6.642512°E﻿ / 47.705419; 6.642512﻿ (Puits No. 10)
The decision to sink shaft no. 10 was taken on May 29, 1880, to replace shaft no. 7, which had been backfilled eight years earlier. Sinking began in 1884 with a diameter of 4 meters, its purpose being to become the ventilation shaft for the Saint-Charles shaft, but with the ulterior motive that it might become a new extraction shaft for the second coal seam left untapped in the outcrop region. The first coal seam was encountered at a depth of 185 meters. Two further layers were encountered at 215 and 222 meters. Shaft sinking finally stopped at 225 meters from the surface.
It was not completed when the 1886 firedamp explosion at Saint-Charles killed 23 people. It was not connected to the shaft until the following June 24, when it was fitted with a fan. After the closure of Saint-Charles in 1896, like the Sainte-Marie shaft, it was left open to allow any gases to escape, and was surrounded by a 2.50-metre-high perimeter wall until the mines closed. In 1958, the wall was demolished and the shaft backfilled with shale before a concrete slab and bollard were poured. At the beginning of the 21st century, the well was covered by its concrete slab (and brambles) at the end of the Xi 30 well cul-de-sac.
Puits Arthur-de-Buyer / no 11
47.677012°N 6.614263°E﻿ / 47.677012; 6.614263﻿ (Puits Arthur-de-Buyer)
The Arthur-de-Buyer shaft was sunk as early as 1894 to secure the future of the Ronchamp mining company. The project was led by Léon Poussigue, director of the collieries since 1891, who was responsible for supervising the excavation work, designing the buildings and installing each machine. The head office is named after Arthur de Buyer, President of the company since 1876, who retired when the pit was put into operation.
In operation from 1900 until the early 1950s, its depth was 1,010 meters, making it the deepest mine shaft in France at the beginning of the 20th century and the first to exceed the depth of 1,000 meters. After attempting to mine uranium after the World War II, it underwent several attempts at reconversion before falling into ruin at the beginning of the 21st century. A project to install a photovoltaic solar power plant by the municipality has been under study since June 2012.
Étançon shaft / no 13 bis
47.709047°N 6.646055°E﻿ / 47.709047; 6.646055﻿ (Puits de l'Étançon)
The Etançon shaft is the only shaft in the coalfield dug in the 20th century, and also the only one dug by Électricité de France. It operated from 1950 to 1958, when the outcrops were brought back into production. By extending mining for a further ten years, it made it easier for miners to retrain. After closure, the site was abandoned, before being incorporated into the outcrop footpath in 1997. From 1999 to 2000, the site was cleared by an association, before becoming a tourist site at the beginning of the 21st century.
Internal shafts
Bures are small internal shafts dug from the galleries, some of which open out onto the surface. In Ronchamp, there were around ten of them, all dug before the hamlet of La Houillère was abandoned. Some examples include: puits Petit-Pierre, puits du Cheval (no. 1 and no. 2), puits du Chevanel, puits Greniguey, puits Saint-François-Xavier (used as a link between the galeries du Clocher and du Sentier), puits Saint-Antoine, puits Pallin and puits de la Bascule.
Boreholes and research shaft
Many mining companies and industrial groups have carried out a wide range of drilling and exploration work for coal (hillside galleries, shafts or surface searches) in the Ronchamp and Champagney coalfields and beyond, particularly to the south and east of the known deposit, in the direction of the Territoire de Belfort and Alsace.) Most of these investigations were unsuccessful, while others led to the opening of small-scale mining operations. Other projects were abandoned before reaching the coalfields, usually for financial reasons.
Ronchamp concession
The Ronchamp concession was granted on September 11, 1757. The concession changed owners several times during its lifetime, merging with the Champagney concession in 1763 and the Éboulet concession in 1866. Several drillings were carried out on this concession, particularly during the 19th century.
Rougegoutte borehole (1822) at 270 meters depth.
Chevanel Est borehole (1825), prefigured shaft no. 1 with two layers at a depth of 141.63 meters: the first being 1.5 meters thick and the second being 0.9 meters thick.
Chevanel Ouest hole (1825) at 162.4 meters depth.
Colline de Bourlémont sounding (1830), encountered with a coalfield.
La Prairie sounding (1831).
Champagney sounding (1832) at 120 meters depth.
Sondage × (1842), prefigured the Saint-Charles well.
Pré de la Cloche borehole (1856–1859), prefigured the Magny shaft, a 1.7-meter layer is discovered at a depth of 648 meters.
Theurey borehole (1866) at 228 meters depth.
Frahier borehole (1870) at 580 meters depth.
Étançon borehole (1949), prefigured the Étançon well.
Éboulet concession
The Société des Maîtres de Forges undertook several works to obtain the Éboulet concession, starting with the Éboulet borehole, dug between 1847 and 1851, which showed positive results, foreshadowing the Notre-Dame shaft. The L'Est shaft, dug in 1856 and abandoned at a depth of seven meters, was dug solely to force the Ronchamp collieries to dig the Espérance shaft in marshy ground. The L'Ouest shaft, dug the same year not far from the future Magny shaft, was abandoned at a depth of three meters.
Mourière concession
The Mourière concession was granted on October 25, 1766 to the Prince de Bauffremont, who did not mine coal. On May 22, 1844, the concession was granted to Sieur Grézely fils, associated with Sieurs Conrad et consorts. A single borehole was drilled by this company near the village of Malbouhans. The result was negative at a depth of 374 meters.
Lomont concession
The Lomont concession was awarded in 1904 to the Japy company, which undertook several deep boreholes between the villages of Magny-Danigon and Courmont.
Sounding at Moulin du Faux.
Pissotte sounding, negative result at 1,072 meters.
Belverne borehole, negative result at 899 meters.
Lomont borehole, four coal seams at 1,106 meters.
Courmont borehole, negative result at 1,068 meters.
Society of Engineers
The Société des Ingénieurs was created in the 1850s, while the two Ronchamp mining companies and the maîtres de forge were competing for the Éboulet concession. Three boreholes were drilled by this company.
Chaux borehole (1856), unsuccessful at a depth of 103 meters.
Clairegoutte borehole (1856), unfinished at 258 meters depth.
Chatelaie borehole (1856), negative result at 600 meters depth.
Nearby farms in Haute-Saône
A concession and numerous exploration projects are located in the commune of Vy-lès-Lure, to the south-west of the Saint-Germain concession, which is the nearest. Other older and smaller workings are carried out in the Athesans and Gouhenans concessions. These three concessions and the Saulnot concession (dating from the 16th century) were combined by presidential decree on March 14, 1879.
Others
Other companies and private owners undertook surveys and other work, often far removed from the existing concessions around Ronchamp, such as the Compagnie Départemental du Haut-Rhin, which carried out numerous surveys between 1822 and 1832 in the southern Haut-Rhin, part of which later became the Territoire de Belfort, and in the Vallée de Villé.
Research at Chenebier (18th century), anthracite discovered.
Granges-Godey survey in Plancher-Bas (1821), unexploited coal seams, identified by two shafts 33.53 meters and 54.86 meters deep and by galleries undertaken by a Belfort company.
Work at Anjoutey and Roppe (1775 then 1840), coal nets.
Work in Arsot forest with a shaft and several galleries mining coal lenses.
Work at Étueffont and Romagny, outcrops and a 30-meter-deep shaft.
Le Champ sounding (1838) at Fougerolles.
Errevet borehole, dug by owners from Moselle, with inconclusive results.
Wittelsheim borehole, near Mulhouse by Gewerkschaft Amélie (1904), no trace of coal, but a potash deposit at a depth of 500 to 600 meters.
Felon borehole (1907), coal is discontinuous and unusable at a depth of 700 meters.
Gabiotte borehole (1906) at Fougerolles.

A rope is a group of yarns, plies, fibres, or strands that are twisted or braided together into a larger and stronger form. Ropes have high tensile strength and can be used for dragging and lifting. Rope is thicker and stronger than similarly constructed cord, string, and twine.
Construction
Rope may be constructed of any long, fibrous material (e.g., rattan, a natural material), but generally is constructed of certain natural or synthetic fibres. Synthetic fibre ropes are significantly stronger than their natural fibre counterparts, they have a higher tensile strength, they are more resistant to rotting than ropes created from natural fibres, and they can be made to float on water. But synthetic ropes also possess certain disadvantages, including slipperiness, and some can be damaged more easily by UV light.
Common natural fibres for rope are Manila hemp, hemp, linen, cotton, coir, jute, straw, and sisal. Synthetic fibres in use for rope-making include polypropylene, nylon, polyesters (e.g. PET, LCP, Vectran), polyethylene (e.g. Dyneema and Spectra), Aramids (e.g. Twaron, Technora and Kevlar) and acrylics (e.g. Dralon). Some ropes are constructed of mixtures of several fibres or use co-polymer fibres. Wire rope is made of steel or other metal alloys. Ropes have been constructed of other fibrous materials such as silk, wool, and hair, but such ropes are not generally available. Rayon is a regenerated fibre used to make decorative rope.
The twist of the strands in a twisted or braided rope serves not only to keep a rope together, but also enables the rope to more evenly distribute tension among the individual strands. Without any twist in the rope, the shortest strand(s) would always be supporting a much higher proportion of the total load.
Size measurement
Because rope has a long history, many systems have been used to specify the size of a rope. In systems that use the inch (Imperial and US customary measurement systems), large ropes over 1 inch (25.4 mm) diameter – such as those used on ships – are measured by their circumference in inches; smaller ropes have a nominal diameter based on the circumference divided by three (as a rough approximation of pi). In the metric system of measurement, the nominal diameter is given in millimetres. The current preferred international standard for rope sizes is to provide the mass per unit length, in kilograms per metre. However, even sources that otherwise use metric units may still give a "rope number" for large ropes, which is the circumference in inches.
Use
Rope has been used since prehistoric times. It is of paramount importance in fields as diverse as construction, seafaring, exploration, sports, theatre, and communications. Many types of knots have been developed to fasten with rope, join ropes, and utilize rope to generate mechanical advantage. Pulleys can redirect the pulling force of a rope in another direction, multiply its lifting or pulling power, and distribute a load over multiple parts of the same rope to increase safety and decrease wear.
Winches and capstans are machines designed to pull ropes.
Knotted ropes have historically been used for measuring and performing mathematical calculations. For example, Ancient Egyptian rope stretchers used knotted ropes to measure distances, medieval European shipbuilders and architects performed calculations using arithmetic ropes, and some pre-colonial South American cultures used quipu for numerical record-keeping.
History
The use of ropes for hunting, pulling, fastening, attaching, carrying, lifting, and climbing dates back to prehistoric times. It is likely that the earliest "ropes" were naturally occurring lengths of plant fibre, such as vines, followed soon by the first attempts at twisting and braiding these strands together to form the first proper ropes in the modern sense of the word. The earliest evidence of a suspected rope is a very small fragment of three-ply cord from a Neanderthal site, dated to approximately 50,000 years ago. This item was so small, it was only discovered and described with the help of a high-power microscope. It is slightly thicker than the average thumbnail and would not stretch from edge to edge across a little fingernail. There are other ways fibres can twist in nature, without deliberate construction.
A tool dated between 35,000 and 40,000 years old found in the Hohle Fels cave in south-western Germany has been identified as a means for making rope. It is a 20 cm (8 in) strip of mammoth ivory with four holes drilled through it. Each hole is lined with precisely cut spiral incisions. The grooves on three of the holes spiral in a clockwise direction from each side of the strip. The grooves on one hole spiral clockwise on one side, but counterclockwise on the other side. Plant fibres have been found on it that could have come from when they fed through the holes and the tool twisted, creating a single ply yarn. Fiber-making experiments with a replica found that the perforations served as effective guides for raw fibers, making it easier to create a strong, elastic rope than simply twisting fibers by hand; spiral incisions would have tended to keep the fibres in place. But the incisions cannot impart any twist to the fibres pulled through the holes. Other 15,000-year-old objects with holes with spiral incisions, made from reindeer antler, found across Europe are thought to have been used to manipulate ropes, or perhaps some other purpose. They were originally named "batons", and thought possibly to have been carried as badges of rank.
Impressions of cordage found on fired clay provide evidence of string and ropemaking technology in Pavlov I, Moravia, dating back between 24,000 and 26,000 years. Fossilized fragments of "probably two-ply laid rope of about 7 mm [0.28 in] diameter" were found in one of the caves at Lascaux, dating to approximately 15,000 BC.
The ancient Egyptians were probably the first civilization to develop special tools to make rope. Egyptian rope dates back to 4000 to 3500 BC and was generally made of water reed fibres. Other rope in antiquity was made from the fibres of date palms, flax, grass, papyrus, leather, or animal hair. The use of such ropes, pulled by thousands of workers, enabled the Egyptians to move the heavy stones necessary for building their monuments. Starting from approximately 2800 BC, rope made of hemp fibres was in use in China. Rope and the craft of rope making spread throughout Asia, India, and Europe over the next several thousand years.
From the Middle Ages until the 18th century, in Europe ropes were constructed in ropewalks, very long buildings where strands the full length of the rope were spread out and then laid up or twisted together to form the rope. The cable length was thus set by the length of the available rope walk. This is related to the unit of length termed cable length. This allowed for long ropes of up to 300 yards (270 m) long or longer to be made. These long ropes were necessary in shipping as short ropes would require splicing to make them long enough to use for sheets and halyards. The strongest form of splicing is the short splice, which doubles the cross-sectional area of the rope at the area of the splice, which would cause problems in running the line through pulleys. Any splices narrow enough to maintain smooth running would be less able to support the required weight. Rope intended for naval use would have a coloured yarn, known as the "rogue's yarn", included in the layup. This enabled the source to be identified and to detect pilfering.
Leonardo da Vinci drew sketches of a concept for a ropemaking machine, but it was never built. Remarkable feats of construction were accomplished using rope but without advanced technology: In 1586, Domenico Fontana erected the 327-ton obelisk on Rome's Saint Peter's Square with a concerted effort of 900 men, 75 horses, and countless pulleys and meters of rope. By the late 18th century, several working machines had been built and patented.
Some rope is still made from natural fibres, such as coir and sisal, despite the dominance of synthetic fibres such as nylon and polypropylene, which have become increasingly popular since the 1950s.
Nylon was discovered in the late 1930s and was first introduced into fiber ropes during World War II. Indeed, the first synthetic fiber ropes were small braided parachute cords and three-strand tow ropes for gliders, made of nylon during World War II.
Gallery
Styles
Laid or twisted
Laid rope, also called twisted rope, is historically the prevalent form of rope, at least in modern Western history. Standard twisted rope generally consists of three strands and is usually right-laid, or given a final right-handed twist. The ISO 2 standard uses the uppercase letters S and Z to indicate the two possible directions of twist, as suggested by the direction of slant of the central portions of these two letters. The handedness of the twist is the direction of the twists as they progress away from an observer. Thus, the Z-twist rope is said to be right-handed, and the S-twist to be left-handed.
Twisted ropes are built up in three steps. First, fibres are gathered and spun into yarns. A number of these yarns are then formed into strands by twisting. The strands are then twisted together to lay the rope. The twist of the yarn is opposite to that of the strand, and that in turn is opposite to that of the rope. It is this counter-twist, introduced with each successive operation, which holds the final rope together as a stable, unified object.
Traditionally, a three strand laid rope is called a plain- or hawser-laid, a four strand rope is called shroud-laid, and a larger rope formed by counter-twisting three or more multi-strand ropes together is called cable-laid. Cable-laid rope is sometimes clamped to maintain a tight counter-twist rendering the resulting cable virtually waterproof. Without this feature, deep water sailing (before the advent of steel chains and other lines) was essentially impossible, as any appreciable length of rope for anchoring or ship-to-ship transfers would become too waterlogged – and therefore too heavy – to lift, even with the aid of a capstan or windlass.
One property of laid rope is that it partially untwists when used. This can cause spinning of suspended loads, or stretching, kinking, or hockling of the rope itself. An additional drawback of twisted construction is that every fibre is exposed to abrasion numerous times along the length of the rope. This means that the rope can degrade to numerous inch-long fibre fragments, which are not easily detected visually.
Twisted ropes have a preferred direction for coiling. Regular right-laid rope should be coiled clockwise to prevent kinking. Coiling this way imparts a twist to the rope. Rope of this type must be bound at its ends by some means to prevent untwisting.
Braided
While rope may be made from three or more strands, modern braided rope consists of a braided, tubular jacket over strands of fibre, which may also be braided. Some forms of braided rope with untwisted cores have a particular advantage in that they do not impart an additional twisting force when they are stressed. The lack of added twisting forces is an advantage when a load is freely suspended, as when a rope is used for rappelling or to suspend an arborist. Other specialized cores reduce the shock from arresting a fall when used as part of a personal or group safety system.
Braided ropes are generally made from nylon, polyester, polypropylene or high performance fibres such as high modulus polyethylene (HMPE) and aramid. Nylon is chosen for its strength and elastic properties. However, nylon absorbs water and is 10–15% weaker when wet. Polyester is approximately 90% as strong as nylon, but it stretches less under load and is not affected by water. It has somewhat better UV resistance and is more abrasion-resistant. Polypropylene is preferred for low cost and light weight (it floats on water), but it has limited resistance to ultraviolet light, friction, and heat.
Braided ropes (and objects like garden hoses, fibre optic or coaxial cables, etc.) that have no lay or inherent twist uncoil better if each alternate loop is twisted in the opposite direction, such as in figure-eight coils, where the twist reverses regularly and thus cancels out.
A single braid consists of an even number of strands, typically eight or twelve, braided into a circular pattern with half of the strands going clockwise and the other half going anticlockwise. The strands can interlock with either twill or panama (Basked) or seldom plain weave. Kyosev introduced the German notation in English. In this notation, the braiding process is described by the floating length (German: Flechtigkeit) and the number of yarns in a group (German: Fädigkeit), rather than by the weaving-pattern names. The central void may be large or small; if large, the braid may be called hollow.
Double braid, also called braid-on-braid, consists of an inner braid filling the central void in an outer braid, which may be of the same or different material. Often, the inner braid fibre is selected for its strength, while the outer braid fibre is chosen for its resistance to abrasion.
In a solid braid (square braid, gasket, or form braid), there are at least three or more groups of yarns in a complex, interlocking structure. This construction is popular for gaskets and general-purpose utility rope, but rare in specialized high-performance line.
Kernmantle rope has a core (kern) of long twisted fibres in the center, with a braided outer sheath or mantle of woven fibres. The kern provides most of the strength (about 70%), while the mantle protects the kern and determines the handling properties of the rope (how easy it is to hold, to tie knots in, and so on). In dynamic climbing line, the core fibres are usually twisted to make the rope more elastic. Static kernmantle ropes are made with untwisted core fibres and a tighter braid, which makes them stiffer while limiting their elasticity.
Other types
Plaited rope is made by braiding twisted strands, and is also called square braid. It is not as round as twisted rope and coarser to the touch. It is less prone to kinking than twisted rope and, depending on the material, very flexible, making it easy to handle and knot. This construction also exposes all fibres, with the same drawbacks as described above. Brait rope is a combination of braided and plaited, a non-rotating alternative to laid three-strand ropes. Due to its excellent energy-absorption characteristics, it is often used by arborists. It is also a popular rope for anchoring and can be used as a mooring warp. Yale Cordage pioneered this type of construction.
An endless winding rope is made by winding single strands of high-performance yarns around two end terminations until the desired break strength or stiffness has been reached. This type of rope (often specified as cable to distinguish it from braided or twined constructions) has the advantage of having no construction stretch, unlike the above constructions. SmartRigging and FibreMax pioneered endless winding.
Rock climbing
The sport of rock climbing uses what is termed "dynamic" rope, an elastic rope which stretches under load to absorb the energy generated in arresting a fall without creating forces high enough to injure the climber. Such ropes are of kernmantle construction, as described below.
Conversely, "static" ropes have minimal stretch and are not designed to arrest free falls. They are used in caving, rappelling, rescue operations, and various industries, including window washing.
The UIAA, in concert with the CEN, sets climbing-rope standards and oversees testing. Any rope bearing a GUIANA or CE certification tag is suitable for climbing. Climbing ropes cut easily when under load. Keeping them away from sharp rock edges is imperative. Previous falls arrested by a rope, damage to its sheath, and contamination by dirt or solvents all weaken a rope and can render it unsuitable for further sports use.
Rock climbing ropes are designated for single, double, or twin use. A single rope is the most common and is intended to be used by itself. These range in thickness from roughly 9 to 11 mm (0.35 to 0.43 in). Smaller-diameter ropes are lighter, but wear out faster.
Double ropes are thinner than single, usually 9 mm (0.35 in) and under, and are intended for use in pairs. These offer a greater margin of safety against cutting, since it is unlikely that both ropes will be cut, but complicate both belaying and leading. Double ropes may be clipped into alternating pieces of protection, allowing each to stay straighter and reduce both individual and total rope drag.
Twin ropes are thin ropes that must be clipped into the same piece of protection, in effect being treated as a single strand. This adds security in situations where a rope may get cut. However, new, lighter-weight ropes with greater safety have virtually replaced this type of rope.
The butterfly and alpine coils are methods of coiling a rope for carrying.
Gallery of μCT/micro-CT images and animations
2D images / sections
2D flight-throughs/sections
3D renderings
3D flight-throughs/sections
Handling
Rope made from hemp, cotton, or nylon is generally stored in a cool, dry place for proper storage. To prevent kinking, it is usually coiled. To prevent fraying or unravelling, the ends of a rope are bound with twine (whipping), tape, or heat shrink tubing. The ends of plastic fibre ropes are often melted and fused solid; however, the rope and knotting expert Geoffrey Budworth warns against this practice thus:
Sealing rope ends this way is lazy and dangerous. A tugboat operator once sliced the palm of his hand open down to the sinews after the hardened (and obviously sharp) end of a rope that had been heat-sealed pulled through his grasp. There is no substitute for a properly made whipping.
If a load-bearing rope receives a sharp or sudden jolt or shows signs of deterioration, it is recommended that the rope be replaced immediately; it should be discarded or used only for non-load-bearing tasks.
The average rope life span is 5 years. Serious inspection should be given to the line after that point. However, the use to which a rope is put affects the frequency of inspection. Rope used in mission-critical applications, such as mooring lines or running rigging, should be regularly inspected on a much shorter timescale than this. Rope used in life-critical applications such as mountain climbing should be inspected on a far more frequent basis, up to and including before each use.
Avoid stepping on the climbing rope, as this might force tiny pieces of rock through the sheath, which can eventually deteriorate the core of the rope.
Ropes may be coiled on deck for safety, presentation, and tidiness.
Corrosive liquids, solvents, and high temperatures weaken many types of filaments in ropes. Such damage is particularly treacherous because it is often invisible to the eye.
Shock loading should be avoided with general-use ropes, as it can damage them. All ropes should be used within a safe working load, which is much less than their breaking strength.
A rope under tension – particularly if it has a great deal of elasticity – can be dangerous if parted. Care should be taken around lines under load.
Terminology
"Rope" is a material and a tool. When it is assigned a specific function, it is often referred to as a "line", especially in nautical usage. A line may get a further distinction, for example, sail control lines are known as "sheets" (e.g., A jib sheet).
A halyard is a line used to raise and lower a sail, typically with a shackle on its sail end. Other maritime examples of "lines" include anchor line, mooring line, fishing line, marline. Common items include clothesline and a chalk line.
In some marine applications, the term "rope" is retained, such as man rope, bolt rope, and bell rope.

Rose-Noëlle was a trimaran that capsized at 6 AM on June 4, 1989, in the southern Pacific Ocean off the coast of New Zealand. Four men (John Glennie, James Nalepka, Rick Hellriegel and Phil Hoffman) survived adrift on the wreckage of the ship for 119 days.
Capsize and survival
After being hit by a rogue wave during a storm, the trimaran capsized, trapping the crew inside. After cutting an escape hatch, they set the emergency position-indicating radiobeacon (EPIRB), convinced that they would be rescued a few days later. The water tanks, which contained 140 liters of fresh water, slowly emptied themselves unbeknown to the crew. The EPIRB, which had a radius of one hundred nautical miles, stopped working on June 13 after 8 days. They made a rain water collecting device by splitting lengths of plastic pipe. After about 2–3 months, barnacles and mollusks began to grow on the hulls, making fishing easier.
In popular culture
Their story is told in the 2015 New Zealand television film Abandoned, starring Dominic Purcell and Peter Feeney, along with Owen Black and Greg Johnson. It was directed by John Laing.
Actors
Dominic Purcell as James Nalepka
Peter Feeney as John Glennie, owner of Rose-Noëlle
Owen Black as Rick Hellriegel
Greg Johnson as Phil Hoffman
Siobhan Marshall as Martha
Daniel Cleary as Laing
Serena Cotton as Heather
Rachel Nash as Karen Hoffman

In survival, the rule of threes involves the priorities in order to survive. The rule, depending on where one lives, may assist in effectively preparing for emergencies and helping one make decisions when injured or the environment poses a danger.
Rule
Typically, the rule of threes contains the following:
One can survive three minutes without breathable air (unconsciousness).
One can survive three hours without shelter in a harsh environment (i.e. extreme heat or cold).
One can survive three days without drinkable water.
One can survive three weeks without food.
Each line assumes that the one(s) before it are met. For example, if you have a large quantity of food and water but are exposed to the environment, then the harsh conditions rule applies. The rule may sometimes be useful in determining the order of priority when in a life-threatening situation, and is a generalization (or rule of thumb), not scientifically accurate.
There may be additional generalizations presented with the rule, though they are not considered part of the rule of threes, and are usually not scientifically accurate. For example, it might be said that it takes three seconds of reaction time to make a decision during an emergency, that one can survive 3 minutes in icy water, or that an individual can last three months without hope (or companionship).
Accuracy
Air
The average person can hold their breath for about 30 to 90 seconds Free divers can go two or three minutes if necessary, which could give lie to the rule of thumb that in a survival situation, a person could go three minutes without air. (Extraordinary times in the 10 minute range are found among cultures that frequently dive underwater from childhood on, and the world record of 29 minutes was achieved with a very specific regimen of oxygen exposure leading up the attempt
Water
The amount of time a person can survive without a source of water (including food which contains water) depends on the individual person and the temperature. As temperature increases, so does water loss, decreasing the amount of time a person can survive without water. The longest anyone has ever survived without water was 18 days. The likely source of the "3 days" number is an experiment by two scientists in 1944, when they ate only dry food for a period of time; one ended the experiment at 3 days in, and the other at 4 days in. However since they stopped the experiment before being in any real danger, the actual survival time at room temperature likely exceeds 3–4 days. However, at temperatures greater than room temperature, dehydration can occur very quickly, and death can occur in a matter of hours rather than days. In these cases people typically die of heat stroke first, not terminal dehydration. One person was purported to survive seven days in the desert, six of these without water, without suffering heat stroke, as the temperature reached no higher than 103.2 °F (39.6 °C) during his ordeal. However, he had reached the third stage of dehydration, which is 80–90% fatal; this likely represents an upper limit of survival at high temperatures.
Food
Many people have gone for over 40 days during fasting and have survived in favorable circumstances. The record, under medical supervision and with the aid of fat stores, tea, coffee, electrolytes, yeast extract, and vitamins, is 382 days.

Rönnskär (Boliden Rönnskär) is a metallurgic plant located in Skelleftehamn, Sweden. The factory does extraction of copper, zinc and lead, and produces important quantities of sulfuric acid, silver and gold when extracted as joint products. Since 2012, electronic waste recycling has become a major activity of the factory. Launched in 1930 as Rönnskärsverken, Rönnskär is Boliden AB's main production site.
History
Gold discovered around Boliden in 1925 and important mineral deposits in Skellefteå accelerated the region's industrial growth. Minerals in Boliden contained high levels of arsenic, so in 1927 it became a priority for the country to develop its own extraction capacities of its own minerals.
The main production site was created by unifying the Hamnskär and Rönnskär islands, and joining them to the main land. Construction of the factory, with its 128-meter chimney, started in 1928. The foundry started operations in January 1930. Production was essentially focused on pure copper ingots. The extraction factory of precious metals was constructed once gold and silver were found in high quantities in the extracted copper.During the 1930s, reverberatory furnaces, converting smelters and electrolysis installations were added to the complex. The sulfuric acid factory was built in 1942. Zinc recycling activities were developed during the 1960s. In 1976, Rönnskär inaugurated the world's first Kaldo converter built for lead extraction. Recycling of metals from electronic waste started in the 1980s. From 1998 to 2000, the capacity of the factory's copper smelter and refinery was doubled to reach a production volume of 230K t/y. In 2012, Boliden launched an expansion program of its electronic scrap recycling to triple its capacity to 120,000 mt/y.In 2021, Boliden launched the construction of a leaching plant and underground residual repository, becoming the first copper smelter worldwide to have its own long-term waste disposal onsite. In 2024, Boliden received 88 million euros from EU's program Just Transition Fund to reduce the carbon dioxide emissions of its smelter, the latter causing 80% of the industrial pollution in the region.
Incidents
On 13 June 2023, a massive fire broke out in the electrolysis plant. 190 people were laid off after the fire, and the damage was estimated to take years to repair. This came after it was announced that a new electrolysis factory would be built on site. The casualties from the incident were completely covered by the plant's insurer.

SOS is a Morse code distress signal ( ▄ ▄ ▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄ ▄ ▄ ), used internationally, originally established for maritime use. In formal notation SOS is written with an overscore line (SOS), to indicate that the Morse code equivalents for the individual letters of "SOS" are transmitted as an unbroken sequence of three dots / three dashes / three dots, with no spaces between the letters. In International Morse Code three dots form the letter "S" and three dashes make the letter "O", so "S O S" became a common way to remember the order of the dots and dashes. IWB, VZE, 3B, and V7 form equivalent sequences, but traditionally SOS is the easiest to remember.
SOS, when it was first agreed upon by the International Radio Telegraphic Convention in 1906, was merely a distinctive Morse code sequence and was initially not an abbreviation. Later a backronym was created for it in popular usage, and SOS became associated with mnemonic phrases such as "save our souls" and "save our ship". Moreover, due to its high-profile use in emergencies, the phrase "SOS" has entered general usage to informally indicate a crisis or the need for action.
SOS originated in German government maritime radio regulations adopted effective 1 April 1905. It became a worldwide standard when it was included in the service regulations of the first International Radiotelegraph Convention signed on 3 November 1906, which became effective on 1 July 1908. In modern terminology, SOS is a Morse "procedural signal" or "prosign", used as a start-of-message mark for transmissions requesting assistance when loss of life or catastrophic loss of property is imminent. Other prefixes are used for mechanical breakdowns, requests for medical assistance, and a relayed distress signal originally sent by another station. SOS remained the maritime radio distress signal until 1999, when it was replaced by the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System.
SOS is still recognized as a standard distress signal that may be used with any signaling method. It has been used as a visual distress signal, consisting of three short/three long/three short flashes of light, such as from a survival mirror. In some cases the individual letters "S O S" have been spelled out, for example, stamped in a snowbank or formed out of logs on a beach. "S O S" being readable upside down as well as right side up (as an ambigram) is an advantage for visual recognition.
History
Radio (initially known as "wireless telegraphy") was developed in the late 1890s, and was quickly recognized as an important aid to maritime communication. Previously, seagoing vessels had adopted a variety of standardized visual and audio distress signals, using such things as semaphore flags, signal flares, bells, and foghorns. However, cooperation in standardizing radio distress signals was initially limited by national differences and rivalries between competing radio companies.
In 1903, an Italian representative at the Berlin Preliminary Conference on Wireless Telegraphy, Captain Quintino Bonomo, discussed the need for common operating procedures, including the suggestion that "ships in distress ... should send the signal SSS DDD at intervals of a few minutes". However, procedural questions were beyond the scope of this conference, so no standard signal was adopted at the time, although Article IV of the conference's Final Protocol stated that "Wireless telegraph stations should, unless practically impossible, give priority to calls for help received from ships at sea".
Without international regulations, individual organizations were left to develop their practices. On 7 January 1904 the Marconi International Marine Communication Company issued "Circular 57", which specified that, for the company's worldwide installations, beginning 1 February 1904 "the call to be given by ships in distress or in any way requiring assistance shall be C.Q.D." An alternative proposal, put forward in 1906 by the U.S. Navy, suggested that the International Code of Signals flag signals should be adopted for radio use, including NC, which stood for "In distress; want immediate assistance".
Germany was the first country to adopt the SOS distress signal, which it called the Notzeichen signal, as one of three Morse code sequences included in national radio regulations which became effective on 1 April 1905. In 1906, the first International Radiotelegraph Convention met in Berlin, which produced an agreement signed on 3 November 1906 that become effective on 1 July 1908. The convention adopted an extensive collection of Service Regulations, including Article XVI, which read: "Ships in distress shall use the following signal: ▄ ▄ ▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄ ▄ ▄ repeated at brief intervals".
In both the 1 April 1905 German law and the 1906 international regulations, the distress signal is specified as a continuous Morse code sequence of three dots / three dashes / three dots, with no mention of any alphabetic equivalents. However there was a convention in International Morse whereby three dots comprise the letter "S", and three dashes the letter "O", and it soon became common to informally refer to the distress signal as "S O S", with the 12 January 1907 Electrical World stating that "Vessels in distress use the special signal, SOS, repeated at short intervals." (In American Morse code, which was used by many coastal ships in the United States through the first part of the twentieth century, three dashes stood for the numeral "5", so in a few cases the distress signal was informally referred to as "S 5 S".)
The first ships that have been reported to have transmitted an SOS distress call were the Cunard oceanliner RMS Slavonia on 10 June 1909 while sailing the Azores, and the steamer SS Arapahoe on 11 August 1909 while off the North Carolina coast. The signal of the Arapahoe was received by the United Wireless Telegraph Company station at Hatteras, North Carolina, and forwarded to the steamer company's offices. However, there was some resistance among Marconi operators to adopting the new signal, and as late as the April 1912 sinking of the RMS Titanic the ship's Marconi operators intermixed CQD and SOS distress calls. In the interests of consistency and maritime safety, the use of CQD appears to have died out thereafter.
Later developments
Additional warning and distress signals followed the introduction of SOS. On 20 January 1914, the London International Convention on Safety of Life at Sea adopted as the "Safety Signal" the Morse code sequence "TTT" ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ (three "T's" ( ▄▄▄ ))—spaced normally as three letters so as not to be confused with the three dashes of the letter O ( ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ ▄▄▄ )—and used for messages to ships "involving safety of navigation and being of an urgent character" but short of an emergency.
"Mayday" voice code
With the development of audio radio transmitters, there was a need for a spoken distress phrase, and "Mayday" (from French m'aider "help me") was adopted by the 1927 International Radio Convention as the spoken equivalent of SOS. For "TTT", the equivalent spoken signal is "Sécurité" (from French sécurité "safety") for navigational safety, while "Pan-pan" (from French panne "breakdown"; Morse "XXX") signals an urgent but not immediately dangerous situation.
World War II suffix codes
During World War II, additional codes were employed to include immediate details about attacks by enemy vessels, especially in the Battle of the Atlantic. The signal "SSS" signaled attacked by submarines, while "RRR" warned of an attack by a surface raider, "QQQ" warned of an unknown raider (usually an auxiliary cruiser), and "AAA" indicated an attack by aircraft. They were usually sent in conjunction with the SOS distress signal. All of these codes later switched from three repeats of the letter to four repeats, e.g., "RRRR".
None of these signals was used on its own. Sending SOS as well as the urgency signal ("XXX" in CW, and "PAN-PAN" in voice) and safety signal ("TTT" in CW, and "SECURITE" in voice) used similar procedures for effectiveness.
Audio tone signals and automatic alarms
Ships and coastal stations would normally have required quiet times twice an hour to listen for priority signals, for 3 minutes, at different times for 500 kHz and 2182 kHz.
Since many merchant vessels carried only one or two radio operators, no one might hear a distress signal when both operators were off-duty. Eventually, equipment was invented to summon operators by ringing an alarm in the operator's cabin, and on the bridge, and the only switch able to disable the alarm was only permitted to be in the wireless telegraph room. The alarm was sent by the operator on the ship in distress transmitting the radiotelegraph alarm signal (auto-alarm) signal—twelve extra-long dashes, each lasting four seconds with a one-second gap between them, and transmitted in A2 (modulated CW). The alarm signal was normally sent with a mechanical or electronic timing circuit to ensure it was sent accurately. However, ships radio room clocks typically had markings on the dial to guide operators in sending the signal manually. The regulations for the auto-alarm were defined in the 1927 Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) international maritime regulations, and in Article 19, § 21, of the General Regulations annexed to the International Radiotelegraph Convention, 1927.5 5.
The Auto Alarm receivers were designed to activate upon receiving four such dashes. Once four valid dashes are detected, the automatic alarm is activated. The distressed ship's operator would then delay sending the SOS message itself to give off-watch radio operators time to reach their radio room.
The radiotelephony equivalent of the radiotelegraph alarm signal is the radiotelephony alarm signal, which is the transmission of alternating tones of 2200 Hz and 1300 Hz, with each tone having a duration of 250 ms. Automatic alarm systems aboard ships must activate when such a signal is received and the receiving vessel is within 500 nmi (930 km) of the transmitting vessel's position, or if the distress position is in the polar areas (latitude greater than 70° N or 70° S). The alarm should also activate when the call is received and the distance between the vessel in distress and the receiving vessel cannot be determined.
Historical SOS calls
Steamship Kentucky sank in 1910, and early use of SOS saved all 46 lives on board
RMS Titanic (which used CQD as well), sank in 1912
RMS Lusitania, torpedoed in 1915
HMHS Britannic, sank in 1916
SS Andrea Doria, sank in 1956

A sabre or (American English) saber ( SAY-bər) is a type of backsword with a curved blade associated with the light cavalry of the early modern and Napoleonic periods. Originally associated with Central European cavalry such as the hussars, the sabre became widespread in Western Europe during the Thirty Years' War. Lighter sabres also became popular with infantry of the early 17th century. In the 19th century, models with less curving blades became common and were also used by heavy cavalry.
The military sabre was used as a duelling weapon in academic fencing in the 19th century, giving rise to a discipline of modern sabre fencing (introduced in the 1896 Summer Olympics) loosely based on the characteristics of the historical weapon.
Etymology
The English sabre is recorded from the 1670s, as a direct loan from French, where sabre is an alteration of sable, which was in turn loaned from German Säbel, Sabel in the 1630s. The German word is on record from the 15th century, loaned from Polish szabla, which was itself adopted from Hungarian szabla (14th century, later szablya). The spread of the Hungarian word to neighboring European languages took place in the context of the Ottoman wars in Europe of the 15th to 17th centuries. The spelling saber became common in American English in the second half of the 19th century.
The origin of the Hungarian word is unclear. It may itself be a loan from South Slavic (Serbo-Croatian sablja, Common Slavic *sabľa), which would ultimately derive from a Turkic source. In a more recent suggestion, the Hungarian word may ultimately derive from a Tungusic source, via Kipchak Turkic selebe, with later metathesis (of l-b to b-l) and apocope changed to *seble, which would have changed its vocalisation in Hungarian to the recorded sabla, perhaps under the influence of the Hungarian word szab- "to crop; cut (into shape)".
History
Origins
Though single-edged cutting swords already existed in the Ancient world, such as the ancient Egyptian and Sumerian sickle swords, these (usually forward instead of backward curving) weapons were chopping weapons for foot soldiers. This type of weapon developed into such heavy chopping weapons as the Greek Machaira and Anatolian Drepanon, and it still survives as the heavy Kukri chopping knife of the Gurkhas. However, in ancient China foot soldiers and cavalry often used a straight, single edged sword, and in the sixth century CE a longer, slightly curved cavalry variety of this weapon appeared in southern Siberia. This "proto-sabre" (the Turko-Mongol sabre) had developed into the true cavalry sabre by the eight century CE, and by the ninth century, it had become the usual side arm on the Eurasian steppes. The sabre arrived in Europe with the Magyars and the Turkic expansion. These oldest sabres had a slight curve, short, down-turned quillons, the grip facing the opposite direction to the blade and a sharp point with the top third of the reverse edge sharpened.
Early modern period
The introduction of the sabre proper in Western Europe, along with the term sabre itself, dates to the 17th century, via the influence of the szabla type ultimately derived from these medieval backswords. The adoption of the term is connected to the employment of Hungarian hussar (huszár) cavalry by Western European armies at the time. Hungarian hussars were employed as light cavalry, with the role of harassing enemy skirmishers, overrunning artillery positions, and pursuing fleeing troops. In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, many Hungarian hussars fled to other Central and Western European countries and became the core of light cavalry formations created there. The Hungarian term szablya is ultimately traced to the northwestern Turkic selebe, with contamination from the Hungarian verb szab "to cut".
The original type of sabre, or Polish szabla, was used as a cavalry weapon, possibly inspired by Hungarian or wider Turco-Mongol warfare.
The karabela was a type of szabla popular in the late 17th century, worn by the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth nobility class, the szlachta. While designed as a cavalry weapon, it also came to replace various types of straight-bladed swords used by infantry. The Swiss sabre originated as a regular sword with a single-edged blade in the early 16th century, but by the 17th century began to exhibit specialized hilt types.
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
In the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (16th–18th century) a specific type of sabre-like melee weapon, the szabla, was used. Richly decorated sabres were popular among the Polish nobility, who considered it to be one of the most important pieces of men's traditional attire. With time, the design of the sabre greatly evolved in the commonwealth and gave birth to a variety of sabre-like weapons, intended for many tasks. In the following centuries, the ideology of Sarmatism as well as the Polish fascination with Oriental cultures, customs, cuisine and warfare resulted in the szabla becoming an indispensable part of traditional Polish culture.
Modern use
The sabre saw extensive military use in the early 19th century, particularly in the Napoleonic Wars, during which Napoleon used heavy cavalry charges to great effect against his enemies. Shorter versions of the sabre were also used as sidearms by dismounted units, although these were gradually replaced by fascine knives and sword bayonets as the century went on. Although there was extensive debate over the effectiveness of weapons such as the sabre and lance, the sabre remained the standard weapon of cavalry for mounted action in most armies until World War I and in a few armies until World War II. Thereafter it was gradually relegated to the status of a ceremonial weapon, and most horse cavalry was replaced by armoured cavalry from the 1930s onward.
Where horse-mounted cavalry survived into World War II it was generally as mounted infantry without sabres. However the sabre was still carried by German cavalry until after the Polish campaign of 1939, after which this historic weapon was put into storage in 1941. Romanian cavalry continued to carry their straight "thrusting" sabres on active service until at least 1941.
Napoleonic era
Sabres were commonly used by the British in the Napoleonic era for light cavalry and infantry officers, as well as others. The elegant but effective 1803 pattern sword that the British Government authorized for use by infantry officers during the wars against Napoleon featured a curved sabre blade which was often blued and engraved by the owner in accordance with his personal taste, and was based on the famously agile 1796 light cavalry sabre that was renowned for its brutal cutting power. Sabres were commonly used throughout this era by all armies, in much the same way that the British did.
The popularity of the sabre had rapidly increased in Britain throughout the 18th century for both infantry and cavalry use. This influence was predominately from southern and eastern Europe, with the Hungarians and Austrians listed as sources of influence for the sword and style of swordsmanship in British sources. The popularity of sabres had spread rapidly through Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries, and finally came to dominance as a military weapon in the British army in the 18th century, though straight blades remained in use by some, such as heavy cavalry units. (These were also replaced by sabres soon after the Napoleonic era.)
The introduction of 'pattern' swords in the British army in 1788 led to a brief departure from the sabre in infantry use (though not for light cavalry), in favour of the lighter and straight bladed spadroon. The spadroon was universally unpopular, and many officers began to unofficially purchase and carry sabres once more. In 1799, the army accepted this under regulation for some units, and in 1803, produced a dedicated pattern of sabre for certain infantry officers (flank, rifle and staff officers). The 1803 pattern quickly saw much more widespread use than the regulation intended due to its effectiveness in combat, and fashionable appeal.
Pattern 1796 light cavalry sabre
The most famous British sabre of the Napoleonic era is the 1796 light cavalry model, used by troopers and officers alike (officers' versions can vary a little, but are much the same as the pattern trooper's sword). It was in part designed by the famous John Le Marchant, who worked to improve on the previous (1788) design based on his experience with the Austrians and Hungarians. Le Marchant also developed the first official British military sword exercise manual based on this experience, and his light cavalry sabre, and style of swordsmanship went on to heavily influence the training of the infantry and the navy.
The 1796 light cavalry sword was known for its brutal cutting power, easily severing limbs, and leading to the (unsubstantiated) myth that the French put in an official complaint to the British about its ferocity. This sword also saw widespread use with mounted artillery units, and the numerous militia units established in Britain to protect against a potential invasion by Napoleon.
Mameluke swords
Though the sabre had already become very popular in Britain, experience in Egypt did lead to a fashion trend for mameluke sword style blades, a type of Middle Eastern scimitar, by some infantry and cavalry officers. These blades differ from the more typical British ones in that they have more extreme curvatures, in that they are usually not fullered, and in that they taper to a finer point. Mameluke swords also gained some popularity in France as well. Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, himself carried a mameluke-style sword. In 1831, the 'Mameluke' sword became the pattern sword for British generals, as well as officers of the United States Marine Corps; in this last capacity, it is still in such use at the present time.
United States
The American victory over the rebellious forces in the citadel of Tripoli in 1805, during the First Barbary War, led to the presentation of bejewelled examples of these swords to the senior officers of the US Marines. Officers of the US Marine Corps still use a mameluke-pattern dress sword. Although some genuine Turkish kilij sabres were used by Westerners, most "mameluke sabres" were manufactured in Europe; although their hilts were very similar in form to the Ottoman prototype, their blades, even when an expanded yelman was incorporated, tended to be longer, narrower and less curved than those of the true kilij.
In the American Civil War, the sabre was used infrequently as a weapon, but saw notable deployment in the Battle of Brandy Station and at East Cavalry Field at the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863. Many cavalrymen—particularly on the Confederate side—eventually abandoned the long, heavy weapons in favour of revolvers and carbines.
The last sabre issued to US cavalry was the Patton saber of 1913, designed to be mounted to the cavalryman's saddle. The Patton saber is only a saber in name as it is a straight, thrust-centric sword. A US War Department circular dated 18 April 1934 announced that the saber would no longer be issued to cavalry, and that it was to be completely discarded for use as a weapon. Only dress sabers, for use by officers only, and strictly as a badge of rank, were to be retained.
Police
During the 19th and into the early 20th century, sabres were also used by both mounted and dismounted personnel in some European police forces. When the sabre was used by mounted police against crowds, the results could be devastating, as portrayed in a key scene in Doctor Zhivago. The sabre was later phased out in favour of the baton, or nightstick, for both practical and humanitarian reasons. The Gendarmerie of Belgium used them until at least 1950, and the Swedish police forces until 1965.
Dress uniform
Swords with sabre blades remain a component of the dress uniforms worn by most national army, navy, air force, marine and coast guard officers. Some militaries also issue ceremonial swords to their highest-ranking non-commissioned officers; this is seen as an honour since, typically, non-commissioned, enlisted/other-rank military service members are instead issued a cutlass blade rather than a sabre. Swords in the modern military are no longer used as weapons, and serve only ornamental or ceremonial functions. One distinctive modern use of sabres is in the sabre arch, performed for servicemen or women getting married.
Modern sport fencing
The modern fencing sabre bears little resemblance to the cavalry sabre, having a thin, 88 cm (35 in) long straight blade. Rather, it is based upon the Italian dueling saber of classical fencing. One of the three weapons used in the sport of fencing, it is a very fast-paced weapon with bouts characterized by quick footwork and cutting with the edge. The valid target area is from the waist up excluding the hands.
The concept of attacking above the waist only is a 20th-century change to the sport; previously sabreurs used to pad their legs against cutting slashes from their opponents. The reason for the above waist rule is unknown, as the sport of sabre fencing is based on the use of infantry sabres, not cavalry sabres.
In recent years, saber fencing has been developing in Historical European Martial Arts, with blades that closely resemble the historical types and techniques based on historical records.

A scabbard is a sheath for holding a sword, dagger, knife, or similar edged weapons. Rifles and other long guns may also be stored in scabbards by horse riders for transportation. Military cavalry and cowboys had scabbards for their saddle ring carbines and rifles for transportation and protection. Scabbards have been made of many materials over the millennia, including leather, wood, and metal such as brass or steel.
Most commonly, sword scabbards were worn suspended from a sword belt or shoulder belt called a baldric.
Antiquity
Scabbards have at least been around since the Bronze Age, and are thought to have existed as long as the blade has. Wooden scabbards were typically covered in fabric or leather; the leather versions also usually bore metal or leather fittings for added protection and carrying ease. All-metal scabbards were popular items for a display of wealth among elites in the European Iron Age, and often intricately decorated. Little is known about the scabbards of the early Iron Age, due to their wooden construction. However, during the Middle and late Iron Ages, the scabbard became important especially as a vehicle for decorative elaboration and social status. After 200 BC fully decorated scabbards became rare, but in their lesser extent existed well into the Medieval period.
A number of ancient scabbards have been recovered from weapons sacrifices, a few of which had a lining of fur on the inside. The fur was probably kept oily, keeping the blade free from rust. The fur would also allow a smoother, quicker draw, and protect the blade. In Britain, wool sometimes lined the scabbard, the lanolin on it working to protect against rust. In classical antiquity, Greek scabbards often had ornamental metal fittings, characteristic of the Iron Age. The Roman army used scabbards to a great extent with short baldrics, carrying their swords quite high up.
Japanese blades typically have their sharp cutting edge protected by a wooden scabbard called a saya. Many Japanese blades such as the Wakizashi or the Katana feature notably curved blades and so the saya was also curved to better fit them. A saya consists of several key parts: the wooden scabbard body or koiguchi, the kurikata (horn for sageo cord), the sageo cord, the kojiri, and an option ornamental shitodome for the kurikata. The saya is typically made of lightweight wood, such as magnolia, and covered with lacquer to protect the blade and prevent scratches.
Modern era
Entirely metal scabbards became popular in Europe early in the 19th century and eventually superseded most other types. Metal was more durable than leather and could better withstand the rigors of field use, particularly among troops mounted on horseback. In addition, metal offered the ability to present a more military appearance, as well as the opportunity to display increased ornamentation. Nevertheless, leather scabbards never entirely lost favor among military users and were widely used as late as the American Civil War (1861–1865). As late as the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, swords and leather scabbards were still being carried on active service by the military officers of participating nations. Metal scabbards had however been withdrawn as noisy, heavy and likely to blunt the blades of newly sharpened swords. In the event swords and scabbards were quickly discarded except for use by mounted cavalry.
Some military police forces, naval shore patrols, law enforcement and other groups used leather scabbards as a kind of truncheon.
On the other hand, in Japan, except for some cases of the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy, water-resistant lacquered wooden scabbards have been used throughout history.
Scabbards were historically, albeit rarely, worn across the back, but only by a handful of Celtic tribes, and only with very short lengths of sword. This is because drawing a long, sharp blade over one's shoulder and past one's head from a scabbard on the back is relatively awkward, especially in a hurry, and the length of the arm sets a hard upper limit on how long a blade can be drawn at all in this way. Sheathing the sword again is even harder since it has to be done effectively blind unless the scabbard is taken off first. Common depictions of long swords being drawn from the back are a modern invention, born from safety and convenience considerations on a film set and typically enabled by creative editing, and have enjoyed such great popularity in fiction and fantasy that they are widely and incorrectly believed to have been common in Medieval times. Some more well-known examples of this include the back scabbard depicted in the film Braveheart and the back scabbard seen in the video game series The Legend of Zelda. This has facilitated the modern anachronism colloquially known as a shabbard, developed by YouTuber and novel writer Shad Brooks. It uses a flat plate attached to the sheath which more easily guides even large swords into the scabbard. There is some limited data from woodcuts and textual fragments that Mongol light horse archers, Chinese soldiers, Japanese samurai and European knights wore a slung baldric over the shoulder, allowing longer blades such as greatswords/zweihanders and nodachi/ōdachi to be strapped across the back, though these would have to be removed from the back before the sword could be unsheathed.
In The Ancient Celts by Barry Cunliffe, Cunliffe writes, "All these pieces of equipment [shields, spears, swords, mail] mentioned in the texts, are reflected in the archaeological record and in the surviving iconography, though it is sometimes possible to detect regional variations" (page 94). Among the Parisii of Yorkshire, for example, the "...sword was sometimes worn across the back and therefore had to be drawn over the shoulder from behind the head."
Modern knife sheaths are frequently made of polymer materials such as Kydex.
Common terms
The metal fitting where the blade enters the leather or metal scabbard is called the throat, which is often part of a larger scabbard mount, or locket, that bears a carrying ring or stud to facilitate wearing the sword. The blade's point in leather scabbards is usually protected by a metal tip, or chape, which, on both leather and metal scabbards, is often given further protection from wear by an extension called a drag, or shoe.

Sell your cloak and buy a sword is an instruction by Jesus to his disciples during the Last Supper which has been interpreted in several ways.
Interpretation
Fulfillment of prophecy interpretation
Christian anarchist Jacques Ellul and Christian pacifist John Howard Yoder do not believe Luke 22:36 overturns the many times Jesus urged his followers to turn the other cheek and not resist evil when confronted by violence during his Sermon on the Mount and years of ministry. They show when the passage is taken in context (Luke 22:36-38), Jesus is also aware of fulfilling prophecy and makes a surprising statement that two swords are "enough."
Then He said to them, “But now, he who has a money bag, let him take it, and likewise a knapsack; and he who has no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one. For I say to you that this which is written must still be accomplished in Me: ‘And He was numbered with the transgressors.’ For the things concerning Me have an end.” So they said, “Lord, look, here are two swords.” And He said to them, “It is enough.”
Ellul, Yoder and Archie Penner claim that two swords could not possibly have been "enough" to defend Jesus from his pending arrest, trial and execution, so their sole purpose must have been Jesus' wish to fulfill a prophecy (Isaiah 53:9-12). As Ellul explains:
The further comment of Jesus explains in part the surprising statement, for he says: "It is necessary that the prophecy be fulfilled according to which I would be put in the ranks of criminals" (Luke 22:36-37). The idea of fighting with just two swords is ridiculous. The swords are enough, however, to justify the accusation that Jesus is the head of a band of brigands. We have to note here that Jesus is consciously fulfilling prophecy. If he were not the saying would make no sense.
This theory is further substantiated by Peter when Peter draws one of the swords a few hours later at Jesus' arrest in the Garden of Gethsemane, slashing the ear of Malchus, one of the priests' servants, and Jesus rebukes him saying: "Put your sword back in its place," Jesus said to him, “for all who draw the sword will die by the sword."(Matthew 26:52)
Jamieson, Fausset and Brown, in their 1871 biblical commentary, indicate "...And He said to them, It is enough - not 'Two swords will suffice,' but 'Enough of this for the present'. The warning had been given, and preparation for coming dangers hinted at; but as His meaning had not been apprehended in the comprehensive sense in which it was meant, He wished to leave the subject".
Motyer, Stibbs and Wiseman in New Bible Commentary: Revised Third Edition (1977) states:
35-38- Finally, Jesus spoke of the new situation. Formerly, when the Disciples had gone out, on mission, they had not lacked anything. Now they would need a purse, a bag and even a sword. The saying is heavily ironical, for Jesus knew that now He would have to face universal opposition and be put to death. But the disciples misunderstood Him and produced weapons. 'That is enough', said Jesus to end a conversation which they had failed to understand. The way of Jesus, as they should have known, was not the way of the sword, but of love.
Figurative
Pope Boniface VIII referred to the two swords in the medieval papal bull Unam sanctam, to represent the temporal and spiritual authority of the church. He wrote: "We are informed by the texts of the gospels that in this Church and in its power are two swords; namely, the spiritual and the temporal. For when the Apostles say: "Behold, here are two swords" [Lk 22:38] that is to say, in the Church, since the Apostles were speaking, the Lord did not reply that there were too many, but sufficient."
Theologian John Gill said in his Exposition of the Entire Bible:
These words of Christ are not to be understood literally, that he would have his disciples furnish themselves with swords at any rate, since he would never have said, as he afterwards does, that two were sufficient; which could not be enough for eleven men; or have forbid Peter the use of one, as he did in a very little time after this: but his meaning is, that wherever they came, and a door was opened for the preaching of the Gospel, they would have many adversaries, and these powerful, and would be used with great violence, and be followed with rage and persecution; so that they might seem to stand in need of swords to defend them: the phrase is expressive of the danger they would be exposed to, and of their need of protection; and therefore it was wrong in them to be disputing and quarrelling about superiority, or looking out for, and expecting temporal pomp and grandeur, when this would be their forlorn, destitute, and afflicted condition; and they would quickly see the affliction and distress begin in himself. In "seven" ancient copies of Beza's, it is read in the future tense, "he shall take, he shall sell, he shall buy".

Serbia Zijin Bor Copper, formerly known as RTB Bor, is a copper mining and smelting complex located in Bor, Serbia.
History
Formation and expansion
The first geological explorations of copper ore in Bor area were conducted in 1897 and covered the area at the time called "Tilva Roš". The explorations were performed by the Serbian industrialist Đorđe Vajfert, who later provided investments of capital from France and set up a company called the "French Society of the Bor Mines, the Concession St. George". The company, with its headquarters in Paris, started operations on 1 June 1904. The French capital remained in Bor until the end of the World War II.
1951–1988: SFR Yugoslavia
In 1951, the company's assets were nationalized by the Government of SFR Yugoslavia. Since then, the company Bor was in the state ownership.
From 1951 until 1988, the company has changed its organizational structure, from the "organization of associated labor" to state-owned enterprise "RTB Bor".
1990s–2000s
During 1993, following the breakup of SFR Yugoslavia and the outbreak of the Yugoslav Wars, RTB Bor made various investments which further initiated opening of the new mining operations such as new pit mine called "Cerovo".
Since the mid-1990s and during the time of sanctions on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, production in the RTB Bor dropped significantly from the very prosperous 1970s and 1980s. This has been due to both diminishing reserves and the inability to obtain new equipment that would most efficiently gather the remaining ore, which is no longer of such a high grade. Copper mining as the key basis of Bor's economy had significant effects on Bor's inhabitants due to decreased production during the 1990s and 2000s.
2007–2008 failed purchases
In March 2007, the Government of Serbia sold RTB Bor to the Romanian Cuprom for a sum of US$400 million. Cuprom pledged to modernize the production facilities in RTB Bor and Majdanpek mine, in order to improve the productivity levels. However, due to Cuprom's failure to meet a deadline regarding the financing, the Government of Serbia had cut the deal and the complex was put up for privatization once again.
In February 2008, following the second tender, RTB Bor was sold to the Austrian A-TEC for a sum of $466 million plus obligation to invest $180.4 million in facilities.
After the signing of the contract was made, the first $150 million was delivered by A-TEC. However, the problems arose after A-TEC missed its deadline for the second payment at $230 million, due to A-TEC's trouble to secure bank guarantees due to the global recession caused by the 2008 financial crisis. A-TEC was not permitted to see returned the $150 million it had already paid. The Government of Serbia later voted to scrap the contract and offer Oleg Deripaska's Strikeforce Mining and Resources (SMR) as the second ranked bidder a chance to purchase RTB Bor. However, after a set of negotiations, SMR decided not to increase their first offer and the second tender had officially failed.
2008–2017
For more than two decades, RTB Bor has been among the most unprofitable Serbian companies, with the accumulated debt of more than 1 billion euros. However, the Government of Serbia kept investing hundreds of millions euros in new production facilities, and even wrote off company's debts worth 1 billion euros to the government-owned companies such as Elektroprivreda Srbije.
Even with high copper prices on global markets, RTB Bor continued with financial losses. For calendar year 2015 net loss was around 110 million euros and for 2016 it amounted to 42 million euros.
In 2017, Greek Mytilineos Holdings won a multi-year trial against RTB Bor before the Geneva Arbitration Tribunal, seeking $40 million for failure to fulfill the contract and subsequent financial losses. During the 1990s, RTB Bor imported the copper concentrate from Mytilineos, processed it, but never sent back 4,000 tonnes of processed copper to the Greek company. Mytilineos has also launched several other lawsuits against RTB Bor over the non-fulfilled contracts signed during the 1990s.
In 2017, according to the general director Spaskovski, RTB Bor had a positive net result after years of net losses, with $306 million (€255 million) of revenues and $73 million (€61 million) of EBITDA. For 2017, around 18 million tonnes of ore was mined, of which 235,000 tonnes of concentrate was processed and finally, 43,000 tonnes of copper, 5 tonnes of silver and 700 kilograms of gold was obtained. Around 75% of the processed copper is exported, while the rest is being further processed by domestic copper companies "Valjaonica bakra Sevojno" and "Pometon".
2017–present
In 2017, the Government of Serbia was obliged to find a strategic partner or buyer by March 2018, in a memorandum with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The sale was later postponed until June 2018. Three companies – Zijin Mining from China, Diamond Fields International from Canada and U Gold from Russia – placed bids in a tender for a strategic partner. The Serbian government has chosen the Chinese Zijin Mining Group as its strategic partner for the copper mining and smelting complex, RTB Bor.
On 31 August 2018, Chinese mining company Zijin Mining took over 63% of shares of the company, in a $1.26 billion deal with the Government of Serbia. On 18 December 2018, Zijin Mining formally took over the company under new name "Zijin Bor Copper". Later, it was announced that suffix "Serbia" will be added. For 2018 calendar year, Zijin Bor Copper had net income of around 760 million euros, with most of it coming from debts conversion into shares.
Organization
RTB Bor Group is composed of the following subsidies:
RBB – Copper Mine Bor
RBM – Copper Mine Majdanpek
TIR – Smelter and Refinery
The ledges of the Zijin Bor Copper are located in the southwestern part of the Carpathian Mountains and are mostly of porphyry type within the Upper Bor District eruptive area. The currently undeveloped underground site "Borska Reka", located within the Jama mine, represents a very significant potential mineral resource.
The overview of total resources:
Criticism
Air pollution
Several protests has been held in Bor in eastern Serbia over excessive air pollution that has been intensified since Zijin took over copper miner Rudarsko-Topioničarski Basen (RTB) in late 2018. Since January 2019, Bor has been struggling with excessive air pollution, with sulfur dioxide (SO2) levels topping 2,000 micrograms per cubic meter, up from the maximum allowed 350. Protesters demanded that the city government urgently adopt a plan so that the line ministry and state inspectorates can react to the alarming pollution levels in Bor. As early as April 2019, the inspector had ordered the company to take action against air pollution of the environment, human health and the environment, because it emitted excessive SO2. Zijin then explained in a letter to the Ministry of Environment that the power outage had caused pollution. However, control a few months later, in August, showed another omission – Zijin did not have a system for wet dust removal during the transportation of tailings on the Bor mine, which also threatened human health and the environment. Zijin was ordered to solve the problem, and the company later told the Ministry that a dust suppression system had been installed, which was put to trial. In November 2019, CINS sought an interview with Zijin on the topic of air pollution, to which the company responded with a press release. It says that by the end of the year, the company will have a total of five SO2-neutralized dust spray machines. Documentation obtained by CINS shows that by that time, two of the machines purchased had been in operation for about two months, but pollution data showed that it had no significant effect on the reduction of sulfur dioxide.
Gallery

A shaw is a strip of woodland usually between 5 and 15 metres (15 and 50 feet) wide. Shaws commonly form boundaries between fields or line a road.
They are usually composed of natural woodland (rather than being a planted avenue) and often have diverse woodland ground vegetation similar to other natural woodlands in the area. They should not be confused with hedges, even when these are made of mature trees.
Like other woodland, shaws may be managed as high forest or as coppice.
In some areas, such as the Weald of south-eastern England, shaws may be the remnants of larger woods out of which fields were cleared many centuries ago, or they may have developed from narrower hedgerows which have become unmanaged. Place names using this form include Roundshaw and Dunnockshaw.

Shinrin-yoku (Japanese: 森林浴, 森林 (shinrin, "forest") + 浴 (yoku, "bath, bathing.")), also known as forest bathing, is a practice or process of therapeutic relaxation where one spends time in a forest or natural atmosphere, focusing on sensory engagement to connect with nature.
The practice has gained popularity in various regions in the United States, particularly in California. Shinrin-yoku can be seen as similar to other adopted east-to-west health trends, such as yoga and meditation, in that it has been linked to numerous health benefits and can be performed solo, guided, and/or with others.
History
Antiquity
The first works related to sylvotherapy go back to antiquity. According to Pliny the Elder, "[W]oods consisting only of those trees from which pitch and resin are scraped off are very beneficial to consumptives, or to those who cannot convalesce after a long illness, and ... the air in districts so planted is more health-giving than a sea-voyage to Egypt, or than draughts of milk from cattle that have grazed along summer pastures in the mountains."
Middle Ages
In the Middle Ages, terpenoids present in the forest atmosphere, especially conifers, in the form of oleoresins (these secondary metabolites found in camphor and turpentine, are chemical defences of plants against herbivores) were used to treat certain diseases (analgesic, sedative, bronchodilator, antitussive, anti-inflammatory, antibiotic and relaxing effect).
Since the 19th century
Finland
The Finnish Forest Association along with the Finnish Forest Therapy Centre promotes forest therapy and provides organized activities for forest visitors to practice it. These activities focus on well-being and mind and body recovery. Visitors include various groups, companies, and communities.
Japan
Japan, being two thirds covered in forest, is filled with greenery and a vast diversity of trees. Residing there is the Hokkaido region, Japan's last great wilderness, and the Japanese Alps, filled with mountain ranges and thick pine forests. The term shinrin-yoku was coined in 1982 by Tomohide Akiyama, who was the director of the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. After several studies were conducted in Japan during the 1980s, forest bathing was seen to be an effective therapy method. Akiyama knew of these studies along with the findings that showed the beneficial health effects of the compounds, such as phytoncides, and of the essential oils that certain trees and plants emitted. Thus, he officially put forward shinrin-yoku as a recognized practice, promoting its benefits to the Japanese public and establishing guidelines for its implementation.
Shinrin-yoku was developed as a response to the increasing urbanization and technological advancements in Japan and was put forth to inspire the Japanese public to reconnect with nature within Japan and as a means to protect the forests. It was reasoned that if people spent time in forests and were able to find therapeutic comfort within it, they would want to protect it.
South Korea
In 2009, the Korea Forest Service opened Saneum National Recreational Forest, the first therapeutic forest. Since then, they have opened more and by 2020, there were 32 therapeutic forests in South Korea.
United States
The U.S. Forest Service put forth forest therapy where there are certified guides for the Association of Nature and Forest Therapy. These certified guides conduct two hour sessions in Puerto Rico's El Yunque Rainforest where they bring along participants to experience the powerful effect of forest therapy.
Practice
Practicing shinrin-yoku means spending time in nature, amongst the trees and grass, and mindfully engaging within a forest atmosphere or other natural environments. It is usually done by walking through a forest at a slow and gentle pace, without carrying any electronics, and taking the time to soak up the surrounding nature.
It involves using all five senses and letting nature enter through those senses. Some examples of exercising this can include:
Listening to forest sounds, i.e. birds and insects.
Touching the ground, the trees, and the leaves.
Smelling the flowers and other essential oils of the plants and trees.
Observing the surroundings and scenery.
Tasting the crispiness of the air while breathing.
Reported health benefits
Immune system booster
Many experiments have hypothesized the positive effects of shinrin-yoku on the immune system. It was shown that shinrin-yoku was associated with increasing levels of natural killer cells, which are important in combating infection.
Mental health and mood improvement
Recent studies in Japan and Europe have found short-term reductions in anxiety, depressive mood, and perceived stress after guided forest-therapy walks. Participants often showed improvements on standardized measures such as the Profile of Mood States (POMS) after sessions lasting one to three hours. Researchers suggest that the combined effects of gentle physical activity, multisensory engagement, and distance from urban settings may contribute to these outcomes, although the precise mechanisms remain under investigation. Longer-term effects of forest therapy have also begun to attract research attention. A 2021 study in South Korea reported that participants who attended weekly forest-therapy programs for eight weeks maintained significant reductions in perceived stress and improvements in sleep quality compared with a control group. Similar programs have been evaluated in European contexts, suggesting that repeated exposure to natural environments may enhance the durability of mood-related benefits.
Decrease in blood pressure and stress
Participants of conducted studies were seen experiencing a decrease in pulse rate, blood pressure, and concentration of the stress hormone cortisol while walking through a forest for even just a few hours. The power of the essential oils emitted within plant life in forests can reduce stress with the decrease in cortisol concentration.
Challenging the effects
In 1985, French water and forestry engineer Georges Plaisance published a book on the subject, Forêt et santé. However, it is not a scientific publication, but a personal reflection published by a youth publisher.
According to a podcast organized by RTS in 2023, "from a scientific point of view, the understanding of the mechanisms that drive these effects is in its infancy".
According to an article in Le Figaro, the physical activity and relaxation induced by walking would explain these positive effects rather than the environment itself. Some feel that the subject has a strong cultural dimension in Japan, not necessarily reproducible elsewhere.

Siderite is a mineral composed of iron(II) carbonate (FeCO3). Its name comes from the Ancient Greek word σίδηρος (sídēros), meaning "iron". A valuable iron ore, it consists of 48% iron and lacks sulfur and phosphorus. Zinc, magnesium, and manganese commonly substitute for the iron, resulting in the siderite-smithsonite, siderite-magnesite, and siderite-rhodochrosite solid solution series.
Siderite has Mohs hardness of 3.75 to 4.25, a specific gravity of 3.96, a white streak and a vitreous or pearly luster. Siderite is antiferromagnetic below its Néel temperature of 37 K (−236 °C) that can assist in its identification.
It crystallizes in the trigonal crystal system; crystals are rhombohedral in shape, typically with curved and striated faces. It also occurs in masses. Color ranges from yellow to dark brown or black, the latter being due to the presence of manganese.
Siderite is commonly found in hydrothermal veins, and is associated with barite, fluorite, galena, and others. It is also a common diagenetic mineral in shales and sandstones, where it sometimes forms concretions, which can encase three-dimensionally preserved fossils. In sedimentary rocks, siderite commonly forms at shallow burial depths and its elemental composition is often related to the depositional environment of the enclosing sediments. In addition, a number of recent studies have used the oxygen isotopic composition of sphaerosiderite (a type associated with soils) as a proxy for the isotopic composition of meteoric water shortly after deposition. Evidence of the presence of siderite on Mars is being interpreted as a possible indicator of the presence of abundant water early in the climate history of that planet.
Carbonate iron ore
Although carbonate iron ores, such as siderite, have been economically important for steel production, they are far from ideal as an ore.
Their hydrothermal mineralisation tends to form them as small ore lenses, often following steeply dipping bedding planes. This keeps them from being amenable to opencast working, and increases the cost of working them by mining with horizontal stopes. As the individual ore bodies are small, it may also be necessary to duplicate or relocate the pit head machinery, winding engine, and pumping engine, between these bodies as each is worked out. This makes mining the ore an expensive proposition compared to typical ironstone or haematite opencasts.
The recovered ore also has drawbacks. The carbonate ore is more difficult to smelt than a haematite or other oxide ore. Driving off the carbonate as carbon dioxide requires more energy and so the ore 'kills' the blast furnace if added directly. Instead the ore must be given a preliminary roasting step. Developments of specific techniques to deal with these ores began in the early nineteenth century, largely with the work of Sir Thomas Lethbridge in Somerset. His 'Iron Mill' of 1838 used a three-chambered concentric roasting furnace, before passing the ore to a separate reducing furnace for smelting. Details of this mill were the invention of Charles Sanderson, a steel maker of Sheffield, who held the patent for it.
These differences between spathic ore and haematite have led to the failure of a number of mining concerns, notably the Brendon Hills Iron Ore Company.
Spathic iron ores are rich in manganese and have negligible phosphorus. This led to their one major benefit, connected with the Bessemer steel-making process. Although the first demonstrations by Bessemer in 1856 were successful, initial attempts by others to replicate his method infamously failed to produce good steel. Work by the metallurgist Robert Forester Mushet showed that the reason for the discrepancy was the nature of the Swedish ores that Bessemer had innocently used; they were very low in phosphorus. Using a typical European high-phosphorus ore in Bessemer's converter gave a poor quality steel. To produce high quality steel from a high-phosphorus ore, Mushet realised that he could operate the Bessemer converter for longer, burning off all the steel's impurities including the unwanted phosphorus, but also the carbon (which is an essential ingredient in steel), and then re-adding carbon, along with manganese, in the form of a previously obscure ferromanganese ore with no phosphorus, spiegeleisen. This created a sudden demand for spiegeleisen. Although it was not available in sufficient quantity as a mineral, steelworks such as that at Ebbw Vale in South Wales soon learned to make it from the spathic siderite ores. For a few decades, spathic ores were therefore in demand and this encouraged their mining. In time though, the original 'acidic' liner of the Bessemer converter, made from siliceous sandstone or ganister, was replaced by a 'basic' liner in the newer Gilchrist Thomas process. This removed the phosphorus impurities as slag produced by chemical reaction with the liner, and no longer required spiegeleisen. From the 1880s, demand for the ores fell once again and many of their mines, including those of the Brendon Hills, closed soon after.
Gallery

Signalling mirrors are handheld devices designed to signal distress by reflected sunlight. Unlike ordinary mirrors, signalling mirrors have integrated aiming aids that let the user accurately direct the reflected beam of sunlight.
Signalling mirrors with effective aiming means are required equipment on the lifeboats and liferafts of oceangoing ships, standard equipment in military survival kits, and carried by hikers and boaters.
Signalling mirrors have a sighting hole and an aiming aid. The aid is a foresight paddle, rear mirrored face, or retroreflective material around the sighting hole. British and American tests found retroreflective aids far superior to the others when signalling from rocking boats.
While ordinary mirrors have been used to signal for centuries, signalling mirrors were developed in World War 2.
Description
Signalling mirrors are called "daylight signalling mirrors" by international maritime treaties and the International Organization on Standardization. The US military calls them "emergency signaling mirrors" or "mirror, emergency signaling". Less formal terms include "signal mirror" and "survival mirror". In Commonwealth countries the term "heliograph" is often used, especially for signalling mirrors aimed using foresights.
The three most common types of signalling mirror aiming aids are depicted in panels 2-4 of Figure 1:
Foresight — aids use the light reflected on something in front of the mirror
Rearsight — aids use the light reflected on something behind the mirror
Reflex sights — create a virtual targeting image visible only through the sight
"Rearsight" mirrors use double-sided mirrors and "reflex sights" use retroreflective material. Independent testing by the US Coast Guard and the Royal Air Force in 1944 both concluded that the "reflex sight" method was by far the most accurate (Figure 2), and all current US military issue signalling mirrors use reflex sights with either retroreflective mesh or perforated retroreflective material.
Figure 3 illustrates what the user sees and the sunlight paths when using the "foresight" and "rearsight" aiming methods.
Figure 4 illustrates the reflex sight "bright light spot" "aim indicator" the user sees through the retroreflective mesh reflex sight used in US military Mark 3 signal mirrors. This "bright light spot" is only visible when looking through the sight in the direction of the main reflected sunbeam.
While the flash from an ordinary mirror can be directed using the user's fingers or thumb as a foresight, this method is less accurate due to parallax errors and the fact that the angular width of the beam is far smaller at range than at arm's length.
Ordinary mirrors do not meet the SOLAS nor the US Coast Guard requirements for lifeboat equipment.
History
Any reflective object can be used to reflect sunlight to gain attention, and this practice is of long standing. In an 1856 account, James Beckwourth describes signalling to Crow Indians with a looking glass c. 1830, and says the practice was common amongst them.
Francis Galton recommended the use of a handheld mirror for signaling in his book "Art of Travel", and was credited in 1857 with presciently suggesting "its great value to shipwrecked sailors in open boats or rafts on the sea, where their signals are often overlooked".
Reliably hitting a target with that narrow a beam with a handheld mirror at range beyond shouting distance is not a trivial task. The angular diameter of the reflected sunbeam from a flat mirror is that of the sun (less than 0.6º), so the difference between a "perfect hit" and a "clean miss" is less than 0.3º. The user is aided at close range by being able to see the beam on nearby objects, but this is rarely helpful when trying to signal a rescue plane in the sky.
In the 3rd Edition of his "Art of Travel" in 1860, Galton warned of the need for accuracy and the dangers of parallax when signalling with a handheld mirror. He suggests the use of various ground-mounted sighting objects, and described the rather bulky and complex self-contained handheld device he had developed.
There seems to have been little interest in integrated aiming aids for handheld mirrors prior to World War II.
Accurate long-distance sun-flashing prior to World War II was practiced from fixed locations to fixed targets. The mirrors on the heliotropes used by surveyor's as beacon targets and the heliographs used by militaries for Morse communication were mounted in gimbals and secured to tripods, posts or tables.
This changed with World War II. Between U-boat sinkings and downed aircraft, many men were dying because rescue ships and planes could not spot them in the water. In several incidents, survivors were rescued thanks to reflecting sun from improvised devices. What was needed was a better way to accurately reflect sunlight from the moving sea to a moving rescue plane - a more challenging task than signalling on land.
Independent efforts began in Australia, England and the United States to develop mirrors with aiming aids to improve the survivor's chances.
The signalling mirror development effort in the United States was particularly intense. As described below, from the start of World War II to 1950, the mirror equipment in US Navy pilot life rafts was updated six times, and the US manufactured over 1 million of a single type of signalling mirror. This activity culminated with the development of the US military Mark 3 emergency signalling mirror with retroreflective mesh reflex aimer in 1949, a model issued to all branches of the US military today.
Australia – foresight and rearsight – 1942
In Australia, Thomas Dunn Robertson began working on his "Improved mirror signalling device" after reading about men dying in lifeboats, and of one group rescued by reflections from a tobacco tin. Robertson filed a patent application on 11 November 1942 for his device, which could be aimed by both "foresight" and "rearsight" methods. The Australian Merchant Marine and R.A.A.F. ordered 13,000 in World War II.
England: "foresight" mirror/heliographs – 1943
In England, the Royal Air Force conducted a comparison in late 1942 between a glass mirror manufactured for the tripod-mounted Army heliograph and several others, including the standard U.S. dinghy equipment - a 4-inch diameter circular disk of chrome-plated brass. The winning candidate chosen for production was a stainless steel mirror with a sighting hole which was blackened against stray reflection, and conical to allow off-axis viewing. A foresight paddle with a hole at one end was tethered to the mirror. The user looked through the mirror hole and paddle hole at the target, then tilted the mirror to put the "shadow spot" from the mirror hole in the paddle hole. The front of the mirror had scribed circles around the hole to create "shadow rings" to help the user locate the "shadow spot". The whole was packaged in a soft fabric case with separate compartments for the mirror and paddle, and the back of the mirror had instructions for use in both diagram and textual form. The instructions ended with the note: "The beam need not be deliberately rocked as the hand does this inadvertently." The sunbeams of the tripod-mounted heliographs the British military had used since the 1870s were also directed with the aid of a "shadow spot" on a foresight, and the issued signalling mirrors were stamped "HELIOGRAPH" on the fabric case. The production model was tested in February 1943. It was produced in both two inch and four inch versions. The front and back of a four-inch version is shown in Figure 5.
US Coast Guard testing indicated (Figure 2) that the performance of this mirror was worse than that of rearsight and reflex sight mirrors, and the US Coast Guard never certified this type of signalling mirror as acceptable for lifeboats. However these "heliograph-style" daylight signalling mirrors are common equipment in oceangoing lifeboat kits of other nations to the current day.
US first generation – plain metal disks – 1939
Early in World War II, in November 1939, the US Navy BuAer was the first US aeronautical service to include a reflective device as life raft emergency equipment, a 4" diameter cadmium plated brass disk without any holes or other aiming aids. The specification was approved on 15 September 1939, exactly two weeks after the start of the war. In 1940, the plating was changed to chrome.
US 2nd generation – metal rearsights – 1942
In the United States, in September 1942, at the direction of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the US Coast Guard, OSS and National Inventors Council asked the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) for a method to accurately aim handheld daylight signalling mirrors. Within a few days, L.L. Young of the NBS invented the "rearsight" sighting techique, using a double-sided mirror with an opening in it.
The user looked through the opening at the target, caught the sunlight passing through the opening on their hand or body, and turned the mirror so the reflection of the sunlight spot on their hand or body seen in the rear mirror surface disappeared into the hole.
On 26 September 1942, the US Coast Guard published in the Federal Register the requirement that lifeboats in merchant vessels carry two stainless steel or other suitably polished metal mirrors having at least 20 square inches on each side, and wrapped in a water-proof container plainly marked "Signaling Mirrors" (46 CFR 153.6), and in January 1943, published instructions on using such mirrors by the "rearsight" method (Fig. 6).
Such double-sided metal signalling mirrors have been accepted by the US Coast Guard as meeting the requirements for daylight signalling mirrors in the lifeboards and liferafts of US merchant vessels from then to the present day.
On 1 February 1943, the US Navy BuAer provided the "rearsight" method instructions to all US Navy pilots and recommended that a 3/16 inch hole be drilled "in the center of the reflectors now stowed in the rafts and also those in stock".
US 3rd generation – "cross-in-glass" – mid-1943
Larry L. Young of the NBS worked with Wentworth M. Potter of General Electric to develop a tempered-glass version with cross-shaped opening and printed directions on the back, and with the OSS for a training film on the device (Figure 8). This resulted in the ESM/1 being issued in 1943. Over a million of the ESM/1 and its smaller successor, the ESM/2, were issued in World War 2. These replaced the brass disks in US Naval Aviation survival kits.
US 4th generation – reflex sight tabs – 1944
Users reported that the ESM/1 was too tiring to use for extended periods or in rough water so a suggestion was entertained from scoutmaster Charles Horace Learned of Carmel, California, who had invented a signalling mirror for his Scout troop in 1933. His suggestion used a retroreflective tab like a bicycle reflector to create a red virtual image of the sun in the direction of the reflected column of light from the mirror, like a modern red dot sight.
The principle of operation is shown in Figure 9.
The light from the sun at right passes through an unsilvered opening in the mirror and strikes the red retroreflective tab at bottom left. That reflector returns the red component of the sunlight towards the sun, but a small fraction is reflected at the rear air-to-glass interface and front glass-to-air interface. This small red fraction is reflected towards the user's eye, in a direction equal and opposite to the column of light reflected by the mirror proper. The result is that the user sees a glowing red ball, apparently at infinity, in the direction of the reflected sunlight. By tilting the mirror, the user can then pass the red ball, and hence the main beam, across the target.
This type of sight, where a target image is superimposed on the user's view, is called a reflex sight. Independent tests by the US Coast Guard and Royal Air Force indicated that the flashes from naive users in liferafts were spotted far more often with the "reflex sight" than with the "foresight" and "rearsight" mirrors (Figure 2). These reflex sight mirrors began to replace the ESM/1 mirrors in US Naval Aviation survival kits in September 1944. While the "reflex sight" mirrors were better, as of March 1945 the Army Air Forces continued to use the ESM/1 & ESM/2 rearsight mirrors, and the Merchant Marine the stainless rearsight, despite both being difficult to aim in rough sea conditions
US 5th generation – red Scotchlite ring – 1945
C.H. Learned's retroreflective tab reflex sight required that the mirror be rotated about the line of sight so that the tab was opposite the sun. Richard S. Hunter of the NBS therefore developed a modification of Learned's reflex sight that used a ring of fabric coated with retroreflective beads (ScotchLite) and a red filter in a rear compartment in place of Learned's tab. This modification produced the red targeting dot at all angles of rotation about the mirror surface normal.
The US Army Air Force standardized these as the 3"x5" "Emergency Signaling Mirror, Type B-1" under specification No. 94–641063 on 4 March 1946, replacing the 4"x5" ESM/1 and 3"x5" ESM/2, but they did not reach the troops until the war ended. The US Navy accepted the "B-1" mirror as specification 18M8A on 3 September 1946, replacing the 18M8 specification for the Learned mirror of Sept. 1, 1944.
This type of mirror is used by the French Air Force to the current day in the form of the "Miroir de Signalisation SOS Type 643" (SOS Signal Mirror, Type 643).
US 6th generation – Mark 3 retroreflective mesh – 1949
Richard Hunter felt that the small circular opening in the Scotchlite mirrors restricted the user's view, and invented a new reflex sight that that sandwiched an annular ring of mesh coated with retroreflective beads between two layers of glass that "provides a materially enlarged field of view, due to many light transmitting screen mesh openings rather than a single opening in the aiming mechanism". After three years of testing, the "Mark 3" mirror was adopted in 1949.
The Mark 3 mirror remains in use to the current day by all branches of the US military and the Royal Air Force. The US military specification was initially 23M5, then MIL-18371, and is now at the "E" version of the latter, or MIL-18371E, with two sizes: "Type 1", at 2"x3" (Figure 12) and "Type 2" at 3"x5". In 2022, the US Government ordered 39,307 of the "Type 1" and 7,030 of the "Type 2". The MIL-M-18371E is also used in the liferaft kits of commercial airliners as well, and sold to the general public.

Silvopasture (silva is forest in Latin) or wood pasture is the practice of integrating trees, forage, and the grazing of domesticated animals in a mutually beneficial way. It utilizes the principles of managed grazing, and it is one of several distinct forms of agroforestry. If done correctly, silvopastures can count as nature-based solutions to climate change.
Properly managed silvopasture (grazed woodland) can increase overall productivity and long-term income due to the simultaneous production of tree crops, forage, and livestock. It can provide environmental benefits, and has been practiced in many parts of the world for centuries.
Benefits
Potential for climate change adaptation
Climate change adaptation has garnered more importance in UNFCCC negotiations in the 2020s as opposed to previous strategies, when mitigation was given more focus. Silvopasture systems which integrate trees and other woody plants along with crops, forage and livestock are a highly sustainable strategy that has huge adaptive capacity, besides its mitigation potential. Open pasture systems, on the other hand, which is often a consequence of widespread deforestation can exacerbate issues such as reduced water availability and nutrient imbalances in soils, leading to negative effects on ecosystems, local climates, and communities—challenges that are further intensified by climate change.
Silvopasture systems influence microclimatic conditions, offering advantages over open pastures and a suitable ‘middle ground’ solution compared to forests in the context of climate change adaptation. By retaining partial tree cover, silvopastures create a more moderated environment that helps mitigate temperature extremes and optimize soil conditions. This offers less stressful conditions for the grazers as compared to the open pastures improving its feed and water intake, reproductive health, milk yields, fitness, and longevity.
The integration of trees in silvopastures provide shade, which reduces the intensity of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) compared to open pastures, while still allowing more light than dense forests. This balance supports diverse plant growth and improved forage quality. One study measured air temperatures near the soil surface (0.25 m) to be consistently cooler in silvopastures than in open pastures, with reductions of up to 7%, while soil temperatures at depths of 5–10 cm are also significantly lower in silvopastoral systems compared to open pastures.
Silvopastures moderate soil moisture levels, with trees contributing to better water retention in some seasons through shading, less wind and reduced evaporation. Studies found that during winter and spring, soil moisture levels in silvopastures are slightly lower than forests but higher than open pastures, while in summer, they provide a balance, preventing excessive drying as seen in open pastures.
These microclimatic adaptations—cooler temperatures, moderated light levels, and improved soil moisture—enhance the resilience of silvopastures to climate stressors such as heatwaves and droughts, which in turn leads to a more robust agricultural system.
Grazing controls understory vegetation and reduces the accumulation of fuel biomass, lowering the risk of forest fires. This leads to the maintenance of profitability and biodiversity and reduction / avoidance of carbon release due to fire when compared to an open pasture and forest. This problem is of particular importance in fire-prone regions like Southern Europe.
A study with a focus on the US suggests that welfare of cows benefit from a Silvopasture ecosystem, as they are shown to have improvement in physiological response to heat stress, increased grazing time and decreased standing time (resting and ruminanting) when compared to cows in the conventional pasture grazing system. This means that a silvopasture system allows livestock to better adapt to climate change.
Besides providing better ecosystem services like water quality and wildlife habitat, silvopasture systems provide farmers and producers with diversified income streams from timber, forage, and livestock products. This enhances resilience to market fluctuations and climate variability - which is enhanced by climate change - making the system highly attractive to smaller or resource-limited producers.
Climate change mitigation
Silvopastoral systems act as carbon sinks that sequester more carbon than monoculture forests or pastures with similar density. Their reduced reliance on machinery also lowers greenhouse gas emissions, making them more sustainable than traditional land-use systems. In contrast, open pastures without tree cover tend to emit more greenhouse gases due to higher soil exposure and less climate buffering.
Studies show that carbon uptake (negative emissions) is lowest in open pastures, intermediate in silvopastures, and highest in reference forests. This pattern is consistent across systems like tree alley-cropping and orchard-hay systems. Open pastures have higher CO2 fluxes due to factors like soil respiration and warmer temperatures. Removing canopy trees in open pastures further increases these fluxes by reducing evapotranspiration and increasing soil moisture.
Silvopastures also help retain more soil carbon than open pastures. While converting forests to pastures initially increases soil carbon, this gain is short-lived due to higher temperatures and faster decomposition. After a few years, soil carbon in open pastures matches that of forests. Silvopastures, with their mix of trees and pastures, may help maintain soil carbon over time, although significant changes often take decades to occur.
Additionally, converting forests to open pastures raises soil nitrogen levels and decreases the carbon-to-nitrogen ratio. While silvopastures show more balanced nitrogen levels, open pastures can increase nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions, a potent greenhouse gas. Overall, silvopastures provide dual climate benefits: they sequester more carbon and reduce harmful nitrogen emissions, making them an effective strategy for climate resilience.
Other benefits
Silvopasture systems create diverse habitats, supporting biodiversity and ecosystem resilience. By preserving native plants, they help local wildlife and maintain traditional agroforestry knowledge. These systems attract pollinators and beneficial insects, improving crop productivity and ecosystem health. Proper selection of diverse tree and forage species is key to enhancing biodiversity both above and below ground.
Incorporating a mix of native tree species in silvopastures not only boosts economic viability but also increases biodiversity, ensuring the success and productivity of the system. Trees offer various benefits like providing forage, improving soil health, offering timber, aiding in erosion control, and supporting livestock health. When selecting trees, it's essential to choose species that complement grazing activities. Fast-growing species like black locust, willow, and mulberry are ideal as they integrate well with grazing. Additionally, indigenous tree species can attract plenty of insect species, which in turn will lead to more bird species, hence enhancing biodiversity and making the natural ecosystem more resilient. Livestock can also consume unharvested fruits, helping to control pests and diseases.
Silvopastoral systems can yield better forage during droughts due to the adapted microclimate. Forage species are carefully chosen based on soil type, climate, grazing tolerance, shade tolerance and attraction to certain species. Shade-tolerant grasses like bahiagrass, bermudagrass, tall fescue, orchardgrass, and ryegrass, along with legumes such as subterranean clover and Sericea lespedeza, are commonly used in silvopastures. These species ensure optimized productivity, livestock nutrition, and ecosystem resilience.
Implementation challenges
While silvopasture has great potential for climate change mitigation, adaptation, and sustainable agriculture, it requires proper planning, financial support, and technical knowledge. In the paper "Thinning forests or planting fields? Producer preferences for establishing silvopasture", published in 2021, the authors conducted a study of Silvopasture establishment preferences among livestock producers surveyed in Virginia (US). The survey indicated that only 8% were interested in planting trees (48% were very uninterested), while about 25% were very interested in thinning woodlands for silvopastures. Forfeited pasture was a constraint for planting for about half (48%) of respondents, while 27% considered thinning a means to expand pasture acres. Some of the most common challenges and barriers to silvopasture adoption include policy and regulatory hurdles, land tenure, lack of knowledge and awareness, economic constraint and cultural change.
Knowledge
A primary barrier to wider adoption of silvopasture systems is the limited knowledge and awareness among farmers and landowners of alternative agroforestry practices. Farmers need to be equipped with knowledge of tree-livestock interactions, pasture rotation, and soil health management for a successful implementation of a silvopasture. Livestock can trample or overgraze young trees and requires protective measures like fencing or controlled grazing. Trees may also compete with grasses for light, water, and nutrients, potentially reducing pasture productivity if not managed properly. Choosing the wrong tree species could result in slower growth, provide poor shade distribution, and leave toxic effects on livestock. Additionally, fire risks can be a concern in silvopastoral systems, particularly in dry climates where trees and accumulated biomass may increase flammability. Without proper firebreaks, species selection, and management strategies, silvopasture could inadvertently contribute to wildfire hazards rather than mitigating them.
To overcome these challenges, well-structured education and extension programs are essential to provide farmers with the necessary knowledge and technical support. Training initiatives, demonstration farms, and knowledge-sharing networks could help bridge the gap, ensuring that farmers can confidently implement silvopasture systems in a way that maximizes productivity while mitigating risks.
Economic
Establishing silvopastures requires substantial upfront investment in tree planting, fencing, and rotational grazing systems. Generally, silvopastures can be implemented in two primary ways: by introducing trees into existing pastures or by integrating pastures into woodland. Planting trees in pastures requires protecting young trees from livestock, years of waiting for productivity, and potentially restricting future land use. Conversely, converting woodlands into silvopastures involves thinning trees to increase light infiltration, which can be labor-intensive, require heavy machinery, and necessitate a strategy for managing felled trees. Thinned woodlands may also experience a surge in weeds and seedlings that must be controlled to establish pasture forage, posing additional challenges. Unlike conventional farms that generate annual profits, both aformentioned strategies take time to become financially viable. Studies indicate that agroforestry systems, including silvopastures, typically take 3–6 years to generate returns, leading to a delayed return on investment (ROI). Furthermore, silvopasture systems often require more labor and specialized knowledge than conventional farming, increasing costs for training and implementation.
While price fluctuations affect all agricultural systems, diversified revenue streams in silvopastures—such as timber, livestock, and forage—can provide greater resilience against market volatility. However, it remains unclear whether silvopastures consistently outperforms conventional monoculture farms in profitability.
Policy
Despite the recognized benefits of silvopastoral systems, several policy-related limitations create barriers for a successful implementation. One major challenge is the lack of binding international agreements. International agreements such as Agenda 21, a voluntary UN action plan for sustainable development adopted at the Rio Conference in 1992, recognize the potential role of silvopastoralism in sustainable land management. However, they remain largely non-binding. Consequently, at the national level, policy incentives and institutional support for silvopastoral systems are often lacking as many governments prioritize conventional agricultural systems. For example, a study from 2024 found that silvopasture producers in California primarily self-funded their systems, supplementing with various limited sources. However, the lack of clear funding mechanism constrained the scale of their implementation.
Furthermore, some policies actively discourage the integration of trees on farmland. Additionally, zoning regulations may classify silvopasture land as agricultural or forestry, which can ultimately restrict eligibility for subsidies or land-use incentives.
In some regions, there are unclear or restrictive land ownerships laws. This uncertainty around land tenure discourages farmers from committing to silvopasture as the systems requires long-term management.
History
According to the wood-pasture hypothesis, open, grazed woodlands of some form or another would have been part of the original European wildwoods even before they were used by humans. Fruit and nut and silvopasture systems covered large portions of central Europe until the 20th century, and are still widespread in some areas. Wood pasture, one of the oldest land-use practices in human history, is a historical European land management system in which open woodland provided shelter and forage for grazing animals, particularly sheep and cattle, as well as woodland products such as timber for construction and fuel, coppiced stems for wattle and charcoal making and pollarded poles. Since Roman times, pigs have been released into beech and oak woodlands to feed on the acorn and beech mast, and into fruit orchards to eat fallen fruit.
United Kingdom
Tree species and planting densities are studied over a range of sites at The Silvopastoral National Network Experiment. Natural England's Environmental Stewardship scheme defines Wood Pasture, in the Farm Environmental Plan booklet, as a structure of open grown or high-forest in a matrix of grazed-grassland, heathland, and/or woodland floras.
Their experience shows sheep use the trees for shelter from wind. This could provide significant animal-welfare benefits. However, 'sheep time' close to trees results in soil compaction, with the greatest compaction after trees are planted at very low densities. Some botanists recommend trees be planted at no less than 400 per hectare to ensure good establishment.
Evidence of old wood-pasture management is detectable in many of the ancient woodlands of Scotland, such as Rassal ashwood in Ross-shire, and at Glen Finglas in the Trossachs. The Dalkeith Old Wood, belonging to the Duke of Buccleuch, cattle grazing beneath ancient oak, is designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) (ASSI).
Epping Forest is one of the principal remnants of wood pasture in England. Here, the grazing of cattle was combined with the pollarding of trees for fuel, both for domestic consumption and for sale. This system continued in the parish of Loughton until being banned in 1879. The town's public hall, built with compensation money for the ending of the custom, is called the Lopping Hall in memory of the practice. Controlled cattle grazing and limited pollarding are still carried out by the conservators.
United States
Silvopastures are the most viable and prominent agroforestry practice in the United States. In the southeastern US, longleaf pine/wiregrass restoration projects have trialled the effects on both economics and ecology of grazing cattle among the trees. This fire-resistant tree species originally grew at low density so that understory plants were available to browsing animals. The region was used as silvopastures by Spanish settlers from the sixteenth century, and this use continued into the early twentieth century, along with felling trees for timber. By the 1920s, most of the longleaf pine which once dominated around 92 million acres (about 37 million hectares) of ground between the states of Texas and Virginia had been cut down by European settlers. Removal of the trees, and loss of their associated ecosystem, led to significant soil erosion as well as replacement with dense commercial tree plantations and open agricultural fields. There has been continuing interest in silvopastures in the residual longleaf pine forests and land restoration projects, with evidence that the multiple income streams of timber and cattle are economically advantageous, along with wildlife restoration benefits. The legal protection of some species (e.g. red-cockaded woodpecker) that can be found in this habitat means that landowners may be able to add financial compensation as a further source of income.

Skidding in forestry is the first operation after logging: it consists of transporting felled trees from the felling site to a temporary dumping site, known technically as a "loader", near a road or track suitable for further transport. This name is still applied to the first emptying of stones in quarries or stone heaps and possibly heavy equipment in mines, to heavy transport operations and cumbersome handling.
Ancient skidding method
In mining, quarrying, and forestry, skidding mainly concerned the usual transport of felled or cut material (wood, logs, stone) or extracted material (ores), sometimes cut to size (squared ashlar), to the road, track, river or top of the slope which, from the loader or loading point, enabled it to be transported onwards. The skidder is then either a worker or a contractor who, in a quarry or on a cut, carries out the skidding, often on behalf of the owner or purchasing merchant. In the rural and forestry world, the skidder is often an independent farmer who adapts his wagon and carriage to this type of activity in winter, on behalf of a timber merchant. The itinerant galvachers or bouviers-charretiers of the Morvan region, who rented the pulling power of their ox teams, practiced this trade among other rural services, migrating north and west.
Forest skidding
Forest skidding is based on a multitude of techniques, which are sometimes combined or added to in succession:
portage, by laying the trunk on rows of sticks held perpendicular (as in the ritual case of the mat de cocagne) or by the triqueballe;
throwing fir trees or limbed trees from the heights, formerly a very rare wild operation across the slopes on specific corridors, and more common on steeply-sloped sunken paths or partly-engineered downhill corridors, to reach the valley or river. The specific localities of this sometimes dangerous activity were called the lançoir(s), jet(s) or get(s). Most of the trunks or logs thrown or tossed were not destined for the sawmill, where they were sawn into boards. In the past, the squaring of timber was done with an axe;
dragging on the ground, possibly using draft animals (oxen, horses, buffalo, elephants) or motorized equipment;
dragging using adapted bards or sledges, such as schlittes, with use of the slope, installation of paths, and possible animal or motorized traction on the flat;
trailering using animal or motorized traction;
floating on the river or sea, with possible towing;
flotation or floating by means of a pipe (flumes);
cable logging;
aerial skidding using dirigible balloons (tested and studied several times, but not tested on a large scale), as the spans are small and the evolution results are catastrophic in changing winds;
aerial skidding by helicopter in the mountains (in France since 1975).
Skidding by dragging and hauling, then by water, was the most common method until the development of railroads. In the 20th century, this method was often replaced by mechanized skidding in forestry operations, which was sometimes considered to be responsible for considerable soil degradation (compaction affecting roots and the circulation of water and nutrients) and environmental damage (noise, pollution from engines, oils, etc., the need for a dense network of roads and tracks, destruction of country lanes and footpaths, etc.).
Today skidding by animals (horse, buffalo, elephant) is in line with ecological concerns in that it is more respectful of the soil and uses less fuel. Cable logging limit the impact on the soil, but at a slightly higher cost, except in difficult environments (mountain ranges not easily accessible to machines).
The specific case of horse skidding
The use of horses in forestry offers numerous advantages, such as soil protection, absence of pollution, and virtually silent operation. Horses can also be used to welcome the local population. The latter creates a social bond with the sponsors and the public, who are more fascinated by the strength of the horse than by the turbulence of forestry machinery.
However, this working technique requires much more preparation and maintenance time (feeding, cleaning, trimming, etc.). What's more, a horse may also need medical care, which requires considerable outlay. Finally, the use of a horse results in a much more expensive hourly service (around €60/hour).
To work safely the horse must have undergone rigorous training to enable it to work in good conditions. Many service providers prefer to lead their horses with a rope called a "Cordeau", as opposed to long reins called "Guides", which require the use of both hands.
To pull logs the horse is fitted with a harness for forestry/agricultural work (made up of lines), a bridle, a pair of guides (or a rope), a collar on the chest and neck, and a spreader bar to hang the wood with a chain consisting of a choke hook at each end.
The use of draft horses is much sought after by owners of wooded parkland, as without the presence of roads allowing access to forests for forestry machinery, the horse can also work in protected areas or areas with fragile soils and plant species (nature parks, Natura 2000 areas, peat bogs, marshy areas, etc.).
Horses, faster and more maneuverable, more nervous although sometimes more fragile than the placid and resistant oxen, were very soon appreciated for forest skidding. A powerful, well-trained horse could sometimes accomplish in half a day the task of a pair of oxen harnessed together in a day.
It reduces soil compaction and does not require the creation of new tracks or access roads. Contenting itself with passages less than a metre wide, the horse respects fragile soils and works without engine noise or pollution. The horse's performance varies according to the team, the size and shape of the trees to be pulled and the terrain, and it can pull an average maximum cube (in direct drag) of 1m3, 1.5 for two horses, with maximum efficiency at 0.5m3 for a single horse and 0.7m3 for three horses. Performance rises to 2.5m3 if a triqueballe or foretrain is used. This means an average daily dragged volume over 100 m of 18m3 (for an average cubic distance (DCM) of 0.25m3), 25 m³/day for a DCM of 0.5m3, and 18 m³/day for a DCM of 1m3. For a distance of 200 m, these figures fall to 12, 18 and 12 respectively. On easier terrain, the fardier (or trinqueballe; a horse-drawn machine with 2 braked wheels, a drawbar and a winch) enables 2 or 3 horses to lift and pull logs weighing up to 5,000 kg (3 to 4m3).
The horse is slower on average, but more efficient for skidding on difficult soils, and less costly (24 euros per hour of service versus 32 euros for the farm tractor (taking into account the cost of purchase and use, wage costs and maintenance and travel costs (identical or close). The tractor remains more profitable for skidding outside the forest itself (on tracks). The horse is more expensive per m³ exported, but it is easier to exploit steep slopes (in the downhill direction), and this extra cost is sometimes entirely offset by the lack of need for infrastructure and by the benefits (wood sold at a much higher price) ofeco-labels such as FSC, which are more easily acquired with this type of skidding.
In the Belgian Ardennes (province of Luxembourg), around 90% of the first three clearings in coniferous woodlands are now harvested using horses, which can easily and profitably remove these light woods.
With motorized machines equipped with auxiliary motorized cranes, carts or sleds, daily production varies from simple to double (15 to 30 steres/day) depending on the difficulty of the site. The tractor also imposes compartmentalization, which results in a considerable loss of usable surface area and soil degradation, as well as a marked artificialization of forests.
Unlike the tractor, the horse is just as much at home in regular forests as in planted forests or protected areas (e.g. for grouse), where it is particularly appreciated. It is also appreciated in cases where the owner applies for an "ecological" forest management label or certification (FSC, for example). It is also effective in assisting the work of river wardens in removing log jams and macro-waste, and in restoring riparian forest.
Winter skidding
For a long time, harvesting in winter was the preferred option for a variety of reasons. Skidding to rivers was often done in winter on frozen ground. Floating was established in spring, when rivers were swollen withmeltwater, and in summer. This was true in Quebec in the early 20th century: around 1930, the first trucks appeared on building sites, and by 1950, lumber was being trucked on expanding road networks; floating was gradually abandoned; finally, all-season timber harvesting and transportation operations appeared in the decades that followed; winter harvesting and transportation activities remained, almost exclusively concentrated in areas such as thin, hydromorphic soils with low bearing capacity, etc. Timber harvesting in Quebec is now often carried out in summer, with autumn spent building winter roads, and transportation taking place when the structure is sufficiently frozen, at the end of November. Frost can multiply soil bearing capacity by a factor of 8 or 10.

Slag is a by-product or co-product of smelting (pyrometallurgical) ores and recycled metals depending on the type of material being produced. Slag is mainly a mixture of metal oxides and silicon dioxide. Broadly, it can be classified as ferrous (co-products of processing iron and steel), ferroalloy (a by-product of ferroalloy production) or non-ferrous/base metals (by-products of recovering non-ferrous materials like copper, nickel, zinc and phosphorus). Within these general categories, slags can be further categorized by their precursor and processing conditions. Examples include blast furnace slags, air-cooled blast furnace slag, granulated blast furnace slag, basic oxygen furnace slag, and electric arc furnace (EAF) slag. Slag generated from the EAF process can contain toxic metals, which can be hazardous to human and environmental health.
Due to the large demand for ferrous, ferralloy, and non-ferrous materials, slag production has increased throughout the years despite recycling (most notably in the iron and steelmaking industries) and upcycling efforts. The World Steel Association (WSA) estimates that 600 kg of co-materials (co-products and by-products; about 90 wt% is slags) are generated per tonne of steel produced.
Composition
Slag is usually a mixture of metal oxides and silicon dioxide. However, slags can contain metal sulfides and elemental metals. The oxide form may or may not be present once the molten slag solidifies and forms amorphous and crystalline components.
The major components of these slags include the oxides of calcium, magnesium, silicon, iron, and aluminium, with lesser amounts of manganese, phosphorus, and others depending on the specifics of the raw materials used. Furthermore, slag can be classified based on the abundance of iron among other major components.
Production
Slag forms during the production of metals in a liquid state. Its low density (2.4) causes it to float above the molten metal (density of steel at 20 °C: 7.85). The metal separates easily from it because slag is an ionic compound, not miscible with the molten metal
Blast furnace slag
It is a co-product from the production of pig iron in a blast furnace, where it corresponds to the sterile gangue of the iron ore combined with the ashes of the coke. The amount of slag produced directly correlates with the richness of the iron ore used. For a modern blast furnace operating with iron-rich ores, a proportion of 180 to 350 kilograms (400 to 770 lb) of slag per 1 tonne (1.1 tons) of pig iron is typical. Extreme values are possible: 100 kilograms per tonne (220 lb/long ton) for a blast furnace using charcoal, or 1,300 kilograms per tonne (2,900 lb/long ton) for poor ores and cheap fuel.
For the steelmaker, blast furnace slag enables control of the pig iron composition (notably by removing sulfur, an undesirable element, as well as alkalis, which disrupt furnace operation)
Experienced steelmakers can estimate the approximate composition and properties of molten slag. Often, a simple "hook test" suffices, where an iron hook is dipped into the molten slag. If the slag adheres in small droplets to the hook (short slag): it is fluid and basic, with a basicity index i, defined by the weight ratio CaO / SiO2 greater than 1. If the slag flows off the hook in long threads (long slag): it is viscous and acidic, with a ratio i = CaO / SiO2 < 1.
However, while a basic slag removes acidic sulfur (SO2 or H2S depending on the system's redox conditions), alkalis are only removed from the blast furnace with an acidic slag. Thus, the slag composition faces an additional compromise: the dilemma faced by the blast furnace operator is sometimes resolved by accepting a relatively high sulfur content in the pig iron […], or by replacing, at constant basicity, the lime (CaO) in the slag with magnesia (MgO), a condition more favorable for alkali removal and refractory wear control.
However, from a thermal perspective, slag is a sterile material to melt, even if its enthalpy of fusion, around 1,800 megajoules per tonne (510 kWh/long ton) of slag, accounts for only 3.5% of the blast furnace's energy balance, its value, though non-negligible, is far less significant than that of pig iron. Poor iron ores, like minette ore, which increase coke consumption in the blast furnace, have been abandoned because the amount of material to heat is greater. Indeed, even for a blast furnace using iron-rich ores, the slag volume equals that of the produced pig iron (due to density differences), the sale price of granulated slag contributes less than 5% to the pig iron production cost.
Steelmaking slag
Primary metallurgy slag (or black slag)
In a steel mill, slag comes from converters, where it is highly oxidized, from ladle metallurgy, or from electric arc furnaces. For one ton of steel produced, approximately 150 to 200 kilograms (330 to 440 lb) of steelmaking slag is generated, regardless of the process (blast furnace–converter or scrap melting).
Converter slag (or black slag) is produced by the oxidation of undesirable elements (such as silicon, sulfur, and phosphorus). However, the oxidation of certain metals (like iron and manganese) is unavoidable due to the process's nature (injection of O2 to oxidize carbides in pig iron).
Secondary metallurgy slag (or white slag)
The role of secondary metallurgy slag (or white slag) is as varied as it is complex. It gathers impurities and undesirable chemical elements by absorbing dissolved oxide inclusions in the metal, typically from deoxidation. For this, managing its composition to make it reactive is essential. For example, a high lime and fluoride content promotes the capture of acidic alumina inclusions. However, this slag must also protect refractory bricks; the adjustment of steelmaking slag is thus a compromise.
Moreover, certain slag oxides, like FeO, can oxidize alloy additions such as ferrotitanium, aluminum, or ferroboron… In this case, these alloying elements are consumed before reaching the liquid metal: their oxidation is thus wasteful. Excessive slag quantities or poorly controlled oxidation of the slag are prohibitive in this case.
In ladle metallurgy or secondary metallurgy, tools for slag treatment typically include a "rake" to "skim" the slag floating on the liquid steel. Hoppers allow the addition of products to form or amend the slag.
Steelmaking slag is generally lime-alumina for carbon steels intended for flat products and lime-silica for carbon steels intended for long products. For stainless steels, their high chromium content makes them unsuitable for use as fill, but their internal recycling within the steel mill is economically viable.
Weld slag
The term slag is used for the crust that forms on the weld pool when using a flux (electrode coating, powder or granules). It protects the pool from atmospheric oxygen and thermally insulates it. It also contributes to the chemical composition of the weld pool, adding or removing elements (e.g., removing sulfur).
In shielded metal arc welding, the coating, when melting, creates the slag.
Electrodes are distinguished by their coating: basic (rich in lime), which is difficult to use but ensures excellent mechanical strength, or acidic (rich in silica), which is easier to use.
Physicochemistry
When molten, slag is a solution of oxides. The most common are FeO, Fe2O3, SiO2, Al2O3, CaO, and MgO. Some sulfides may also be present, but the presence of lime and alumina reduces their solubility.
The molecular geometry of molten slag can be categorized into three oxide groups: acidic, basic, and neutral. The most common acidic oxides are silica and alumina. When molten, these oxides polymerize, forming long complexes. Acidic slags are thus highly viscous and do not readily assimilate acidic oxides present in the molten metal.
Basic oxides, such as lime (CaO) or magnesia (MgO), dissolve in an acidic slag as ionic compounds. They break the molecular chains of acidic oxides into smaller units, making the slag less viscous and facilitating the assimilation of other acidic oxides. Up to a certain limit, adding basic oxides to an acidic slag or acidic oxides to a basic slag lowers the melting point.
Neutral oxides (slightly acidic), such as wustite (FeO) or Cu2O, react minimally with oxide chains.
In general, electrical conductivity varies greatly with temperature, and increases with basicity (i.e., with slag fluidity, promoting ion diffusion in the molten medium) and the content of copper and iron oxides. Surface tension, however, depends little on temperature and increases with acidity, i.e., with slag viscosity.
Ore smelting
In nature, iron, copper, lead, nickel, and other metals are found in impure states called ores, often oxidized and mixed in with silicates of other metals. During smelting, when the ore is exposed to high temperatures, these impurities are separated from the molten metal and can be removed. Slag is the collection of compounds that are removed. In many smelting processes, oxides are introduced to control the slag chemistry, assisting in the removal of impurities and protecting the furnace refractory lining from excessive wear. In this case, the slag is termed synthetic. A good example is steelmaking slag: quicklime (CaO) and magnesite (MgCO3) are introduced for refractory protection, neutralizing the alumina and silica separated from the metal, and assisting in the removal of sulfur and phosphorus from the steel.
As a co-product of steelmaking, slag is typically produced either through the blast furnace – oxygen converter route or the electric arc furnace – ladle furnace route. To flux the silica produced during steelmaking, limestone and/or dolomite are added, as well as other types of slag conditioners such as calcium aluminate or fluorspar.
Classifications
There are three types of slag: ferrous, ferroalloy, non-ferrous slags, which are produced through different smelting processes.
Ferrous slag
Ferrous slags are produced in different stages of the iron and steelmaking processes resulting in varying physiochemical properties. Additionally, the rate of cooling of the slag material affects its degree of crystallinity further diversifying its range of properties. For example, slow cooled blast furnace slags (or air-cooled slags) tend to have more crystalline phases than quenched blast furnace slags (ground granulated blast furnace slags) making it denser and better suited as an aggregate. It may also have higher free calcium oxide and magnesium oxide content, which are often converted to its hydrated forms if excessive volume expansions are not desired. On the other hand, water quenched blast furnace slags have greater amorphous phases giving it latent hydraulic properties (as discovered by Emil Langen in 1862) similar to Portland cement.
During the process of smelting iron, ferrous slag is created, but dominated by calcium and silicon compositions. Through this process, ferrous slag can be broken down into blast furnace slag (produced from iron oxides of molten iron), then steel slag (forms when steel scrap and molten iron combined). The major phases of ferrous slag contain calcium-rich olivine-group silicates and melilite-group silicates.
Slag from steel mills in ferrous smelting is designed to minimize iron loss, which gives out the significant amount of iron, following by oxides of calcium, silicon, magnesium, and aluminium. As the slag is cooled down by water, several chemical reactions from a temperature of around 2,600 °F (1,430 °C) (such as oxidization) take place within the slag.
Based on a case study at the Hopewell National Historical Site in Berks and Chester counties, Pennsylvania, US, ferrous slag usually contains lower concentration of various types of trace elements than non-ferrous slag. However, some of them, such as arsenic (As), iron, and manganese, can accumulate in groundwater and surface water to levels that can exceed environmental guidelines.
Non-ferrous slag
Non-ferrous slag is produced from non-ferrous metals of natural ores. Non-ferrous slag can be characterized into copper, lead, and zinc slags due to the ores' compositions, and they have more potential to impact the environment negatively than ferrous slag. The smelting of copper, lead and bauxite in non-ferrous smelting, for instance, is designed to remove the iron and silica that often occurs with those ores, and separates them as iron-silicate-based slags.
Copper slag, the waste product of smelting copper ores, was studied in an abandoned Penn Mine in California, US. For six to eight months per year, this region is flooded and becomes a reservoir for drinking water and irrigation. Samples collected from the reservoir showed the higher concentration of cadmium (Cd) and lead (Pb) that exceeded regulatory guidelines.
Applications
Slags can serve other purposes, such as assisting in the temperature control of the smelting, and minimizing any re-oxidation of the final liquid metal product before the molten metal is removed from the furnace and used to make solid metal. In some smelting processes, such as ilmenite smelting to produce titanium dioxide, the slag can be the valuable product.
Ancient uses
During the Bronze Age of the Mediterranean area there were a vast number of differential metallurgical processes in use. A slag by-product of such workings was a colorful, glassy material found on the surfaces of slag from ancient copper foundries. It was primarily blue or green and was formerly chipped away and melted down to make glassware products and jewelry. It was also ground into powder to add to glazes for use in ceramics. Some of the earliest such uses for the by-products of slag have been found in ancient Egypt.
Historically, the re-smelting of iron ore slag was common practice, as improved smelting techniques permitted greater iron yields—in some cases exceeding that which was originally achieved. During the early 20th century, iron ore slag was also ground to a powder and used to make agate glass, also known as slag glass.
Modern uses
Construction
Use of slags in the construction industry dates back to the 1800s, when blast furnace slags were used to build roads and railroad ballast. During this time, it was also used as an aggregate and had begun being integrated into the cement industry as a geopolymer.
Today, ground granulated blast furnace slags are used in combination with Portland cement to create "slag cement". Granulated blast furnace slags react with portlandite (Ca(OH)2), which is formed during cement hydration, via the pozzolanic reaction to produce cementitious properties that primarily contribute to the later strength gain of concrete. This leads to concrete with reduced permeability and better durability. Careful consideration of the slag type used is required, as the high calcium oxide and magnesium oxide content can lead to excessive volume expansion and cracking in concrete.
These hydraulic properties have also been used for soil stabilization in roads and railroad constructions.
Granulated blast furnace slag is used in the manufacture of high-performance concretes, especially those used in the construction of bridges and coastal features, where its low permeability and greater resistance to chlorides and sulfates can help to reduce corrosive action and deterioration of the structure.
Slag can also be used to create fibers used as an insulation material called slag wool.
Slag is also used as aggregate in asphalt concrete for paving roads. A 2022 study in Finland found that road surfaces containing ferrochrome slag release a highly abrasive dust that has caused car parts to wear at significantly greater than normal rates.
Wastewater treatment and agriculture
Dissolution of slags generate alkalinity that can be used to precipitate out metals, sulfates, and excess nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) in wastewater treatment. Similarly, ferrous slags have been used as soil conditioners to re-balance soil pH and fertilizers as sources of calcium and magnesium.
Because of the slowly released phosphate content in phosphorus-containing slag, and because of its liming effect, it is valued as fertilizer in gardens and farms in steel making areas. However, the most important application is construction.
Emerging applications
Slags have one of the highest carbonation potential among the industrial alkaline waste due their high calcium oxide and magnesium oxide content, inspiring further studies to test its feasibility in CO2 capture and storage (CCS) methods (e.g., direct aqueous sequestration, dry gas-solid carbonation among others). Across these CCS methods, slags can be transformed into precipitated calcium carbonates to be used in the plastic, and concrete industries and leached for metals to be used in the electronic industries.
However, high physical and chemical variability across different types of slags results in performance and yield inconsistencies. Moreover, stoichiometric-based calculation of the carbonation potential can lead to overestimation that can further obfuscate the material's true potential. To this end, some have proposed performing a series of experiments testing the reactivity of a specific slag material (i.e., dissolution) or using the topological constraint theory (TCT) to account for its complex chemical network.
Health and environmental effect
Slags are transported along with slag tailings to "slag dumps", where they are exposed to weathering, with the possibility of leaching of toxic elements and hyperalkaline runoffs into the soil and water, endangering the local ecological communities. Leaching concerns are typically around non-ferrous or base metal slags, which tend to have higher concentrations of toxic elements. However, ferrous and ferroalloy slags may also have them, which raises concerns about highly weathered slag dumps and upcycled materials.
Dissolution of slags can produce highly alkaline groundwater with pH values above 12. The calcium silicates (CaSiO4) in slags react with water to produce calcium hydroxide ions that leads to a higher concentration of hydroxide (OH-) in ground water. This alkalinity promotes the mineralization of dissolved CO2 (from the atmosphere) to produce calcite (CaCO3), which can accumulate to as thick as 20 cm. This can also lead to the dissolution of other metals in slag, such as iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), nickel (Ni), and molybdenum (Mo), which become insoluble in water and mobile as particulate matter. The most effective method to detoxify alkaline ground water discharge is air sparging.
Fine slags and slag dusts generated from milling slags to be recycled into the smelting process or upcycled in a different industry (e.g. construction) can be carried by the wind, affecting a larger ecosystem. It can be ingested and inhaled, posing a direct health risk to the communities near the plants, mines, disposal sites, etc.

The Smackover Formation is a geologic formation that extends under portions of Arkansas, Louisiana, Texas, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida. It preserves fossils dating back to the Jurassic period. The formation is a relic of a former ancient sea that left an extensive, porous, and permeable limestone geologic unit.
The Smackover Formation consists of oolitic limestones and silty limestones.
Mineral resources
The Smackover Formation has been a prolific source of petroleum since the 1920s. Since the 2000s, brine from the formation has been refined to extract bromine. In the 2020s, feasibility studies to extract commercial quantities of lithium are underway.
The 1922 discovery of the Smackover oil field, after which the Smackover Formation is named, resulted in a sizable oil boom in southern Arkansas.
In addition to being a petroleum reservoir, as of 2015, the brine from the Smackover Formation is the only source of commercial bromine in the United States.
A 2022 report estimated that the lithium brine in the formation has "sufficient lithium to produce enough batteries for 50 million electric vehicles". In October 2024, federal and state researchers announced the geologic formation may hold five to nineteen million tons of lithium, which is approximately nine times the projected annual worldwide 2030 demand for electric vehicles.
Results published in 2025 from multiple exploration wells in Lafayette County, Arkansas found an average lithium concentration of 582 mg/L (4,860 lb/million US gal) in the subsurface brine of the upper Smackover Formation including one exploration well with the highest lithium concentration reported to that date in the southwest Arkansas Smackover formation, 616 mg/L (5,140 lb/million US gal).

Smelting is a process of applying heat and a chemical reducing agent to an ore to extract a desired base metal product. It is a form of extractive metallurgy that is used to obtain many metals such as iron, copper, silver, tin, lead, and zinc. Smelting uses heat and a chemical reducing agent to decompose the ore, driving off other elements as gases or slag and leaving the metal behind. The reducing agent is commonly a fossil-fuel source of carbon, such as carbon monoxide from incomplete combustion of coke—or, in earlier times, of charcoal. The oxygen in the ore binds to carbon at high temperatures, as the chemical potential energy of the bonds in carbon dioxide (CO2) is lower than that of the bonds in the ore.
Sulfide ores such as those commonly used to obtain copper, zinc, or lead, are roasted before smelting in order to convert the sulfides to oxides, which are more readily reduced to the metal. Roasting heats the ore in the presence of oxygen from air, oxidizing the ore and liberating the sulfur as sulfur dioxide gas.
Smelting most prominently takes place in a blast furnace to produce pig iron, which is converted into steel. Plants for the electrolytic reduction of aluminium are referred to as aluminium smelters.
Smelters can be classified into two types depending on their business model; custom smelters and integrated smelters. A custom smelter is a smelter that treats ore on behalf of customers or buys ore for treatment. Custom smelters obtain ore concentrates from mines of different ownership. Integrated smelters depend directly on a specific mining operation and tend to be located next to a mine.
Process
Smelting involves more than just melting the metal out of its ore. Most ores comprise chemical compounds of the metal and other elements, such as oxygen (as an oxide), sulfur (as a sulfide), or carbon and oxygen together (as a carbonate). To extract the metal, workers must make these compounds undergo a chemical reaction. Smelting, therefore, consists of using suitable reducing substances that combine with those oxidizing elements to free the metal.
Roasting
In the case of sulfides and carbonates, a process called "roasting" removes the unwanted carbon or sulfur, leaving an oxide, which is more suitable for reduction to metal. Roasting is usually carried out in an oxidizing environment. A few practical examples:
For sulfide ores, roasting results in replacement of sulfide, partly or completely, by oxide. For molybdenum disulfide, the main ore of Mo, roasting proceeds as follows:
MoS2 + 3O2 → MoO2 + 2 SO2
Reduction
Reduction is the final, high-temperature step in smelting, in which the oxide becomes the elemental metal. A reducing environment (often provided by carbon monoxide, made by incomplete combustion in an air-starved furnace) pulls the final oxygen atoms from the raw metal. The carbon source acts as a chemical reactant to remove oxygen from the ore, yielding the purified metal element as a product. The carbon source is oxidized in two stages. First, carbon (C) combusts with oxygen (O2) in the air to produce carbon monoxide (CO). Second, the carbon monoxide reacts with the ore (e.g. Fe2O3) and removes one of its oxygen atoms, releasing carbon dioxide (CO2). After successive interactions with carbon monoxide, all of the oxygen in the ore will be removed, leaving the raw metal element (e.g. Fe). As most ores are impure, it is often necessary to use flux, such as limestone (or dolomite), to remove the accompanying rock gangue as slag. This calcination reaction emits carbon dioxide.
The required temperature varies both in absolute terms and in terms of the melting point of the base metal. Examples:
Iron oxide becomes metallic iron at roughly 1250 °C (2282 °F or 1523 K), almost 300 degrees below iron's melting point of 1538 °C (2800 °F or 1811 K).
Mercuric oxide becomes vaporous mercury near 550 °C (1022 °F or 823 K), almost 600 degrees above mercury's melting point of -38 °C (-36.4 °F or 235 K), and also above mercury's boiling point.
Fluxes
Fluxes are materials added to the ore during smelting to catalyze the desired reactions and to chemically bind to unwanted impurities or reaction products. Calcium carbonate or calcium oxide in the form of lime are often used for this purpose, since they react with sulfur, phosphorus, and silicon impurities to allow them to be readily separated and discarded, in the form of slag. Fluxes may also serve to control the viscosity and neutralize unwanted acids.
Flux and slag can provide a secondary service after the reduction step is complete; they provide a molten cover on the purified metal, preventing contact with oxygen while still hot enough to readily oxidize. This prevents impurities from forming in the metal.
Sulfide ores
The ores of base metals are often sulfides. In recent centuries, reverberatory furnaces have been used to keep the charge being smelted separately from the fuel. Traditionally, they were used for the first step of smelting: forming two liquids, one an oxide slag containing most of the impurities, and the other a sulfide matte containing the valuable metal sulfide and some impurities. Such "reverb" furnaces are today about 40 meters long, 3 meters high, and 10 meters wide. Fuel is burned at one end to melt the dry sulfide concentrates (usually after partial roasting) which are fed through openings in the roof of the furnace. The slag floats over the heavier matte and is removed and discarded or recycled. The sulfide matte is then sent to the converter. The precise details of the process vary from one furnace to another depending on the mineralogy of the ore body.
While reverberatory furnaces produced slags containing very little copper, they were relatively energy inefficient and off-gassed a low concentration of sulfur dioxide that was difficult to capture; a new generation of copper smelting technologies has supplanted them. More recent furnaces exploit bath smelting, top-jetting lance smelting, flash smelting, and blast furnaces. Some examples of bath smelters include the Noranda furnace, the Isasmelt furnace, the Teniente reactor, the Vunyukov smelter, and the SKS technology. Top-jetting lance smelters include the Mitsubishi smelting reactor. Flash smelters account for over 50% of the world's copper smelters. There are many more varieties of smelting processes, including the Kivset, Ausmelt, Tamano, EAF, and BF.
History
Of the seven metals known in antiquity, only gold regularly occurs in nature as a native metal. The others – copper, lead, silver, tin, iron, and mercury – occur primarily as minerals, although native copper is occasionally found in commercially significant quantities. These minerals are primarily carbonates, sulfides, or oxides of the metal, mixed with other components such as silica and alumina. Roasting the carbonate and sulfide minerals in the air converts them to oxides. The oxides, in turn, are smelted into the metal. Carbon monoxide was (and is) the reducing agent of choice for smelting. It is easily produced during the heating process, and as a gas comes into intimate contact with the ore.
In the Old World, humans learned to smelt metals in prehistoric times, more than 8000 years ago. The discovery and use of the "useful" metals – copper and bronze at first, then iron a few millennia later – had an enormous impact on human society. The impact was so pervasive that scholars traditionally divide ancient history into Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age.
In the Americas, pre-Inca civilizations of the central Andes in Peru had mastered the smelting of copper and silver at least six centuries before the first Europeans arrived in the 16th century, while never mastering the smelting of metals such as iron for use with weapon craft.
Copper and bronze
Copper was the first metal to be smelted. How the discovery came about is debated. Campfires are about 200 °C short of the temperature needed, so some propose that the first smelting of copper may have occurred in pottery kilns. (The development of copper smelting in the Andes, which is believed to have occurred independently of the Old World, may have occurred in the same way.)
The earliest current evidence of copper smelting, dating from between 5500 BC and 5000 BC, has been found in Pločnik and Belovode, Serbia. A mace head found in Turkey and dated to 5000 BC, once thought to be the oldest evidence, now appears to be hammered, native copper.
Copper–tin bronzes, harder, and more durable, were developed around 3500 BC, also in Asia Minor.
At present-day the direct product of copper smelters is anode copper which has a purity ranging from 98.5 to 99.8%. Anode copper can then be electrorefined to produce cathode copper with a purity of 99.99%.
Tin and lead
The earliest known cast lead beads were thought to be in the Çatalhöyük site in Anatolia (Turkey), and dated from about 6500 BC. However, recent research has discovered that this was not lead, but rather cerussite and galena, minerals rich in, but distinct from, lead.
Since the discovery happened several millennia before the invention of writing, there is no written record of how it was made. However, tin and lead can be smelted by placing the ores in a wood fire, leaving the possibility that the discovery may have occurred by accident. Recent scholarship however has called this find into question.
Lead is a common metal, but its discovery had relatively little impact in the ancient world. It is too soft to use for structural elements or weapons, though its high density relative to other metals makes it ideal for sling projectiles. However, since it was easy to cast and shape, workers in the classical world of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome used it extensively to pipe and store water. They also used it as a mortar in stone buildings.
Tin was much less common than lead, is only marginally harder, and had even less impact by itself.
Early iron smelting
The earliest evidence for iron-making is a small number of iron fragments with the appropriate amounts of carbon admixture found in the Proto-Hittite layers at Kaman-Kalehöyük and dated to 2200–2000 BC. Souckova-Siegolová (2001) shows that iron implements were made in Central Anatolia in very limited quantities around 1800 BC and were in general use by elites, though not by commoners, during the New Hittite Empire (~1400–1200 BC).
Archaeologists have found indications of iron working in Ancient Egypt, somewhere between the Third Intermediate Period and 23rd Dynasty (ca. 1100–750 BC). Significantly though, they have found no evidence of iron ore smelting in any (pre-modern) period. In addition, very early instances of carbon steel were in production around 2000 years ago (around the first-century.) in northwest Tanzania, based on complex preheating principles. These discoveries are significant for the history of metallurgy.
Most early processes in Europe and Africa involved smelting iron ore in a bloomery, where the temperature is kept low enough so that the iron does not melt. This produces a spongy mass of iron called a bloom, which then must be consolidated with a hammer to produce wrought iron. Some of the earliest evidence to date for the bloomery smelting of iron is found at Tell Hammeh, Jordan, radiocarbon-dated to c. 930 BC.
Lejja, a village in Nsukka, Enugu State, Nigeria, is recorded to have engaged in iron smelting as far back as pre-2000 BC.
Later iron smelting
From the medieval period, an indirect process began to replace the direct reduction in bloomeries. This used a blast furnace to make pig iron, which then had to undergo a further process to make forgeable bar iron. Processes for the second stage include fining in a finery forge. In the 13th century during the High Middle Ages the blast furnace was introduced by China, which had been using it since as early as 200 b.c during the Qin dynasty. Puddling was also introduced in the Industrial Revolution.
Both processes are now obsolete, and wrought iron is now rarely made. Instead, mild steel is produced from a Bessemer converter or by other means including smelting reduction processes such as the Corex Process.
Environmental and occupational health impacts
Smelting has serious effects on the environment, producing wastewater and slag and releasing such toxic metals as copper, silver, iron, cobalt, and selenium into the atmosphere. Smelters also release gaseous sulfur dioxide, contributing to acid rain, which acidifies soil and water.
The smelter in Flin Flon, Canada was one of the largest point sources of mercury in North America in the 20th century. Even after smelter releases were drastically reduced, landscape re-emission continued to be a major regional source of mercury. Lakes will likely receive mercury contamination from the smelter for decades, from both re-emissions returning as rainwater and leaching of metals from the soil.
Air pollution
Air pollutants generated by aluminium smelters include carbonyl sulfide, hydrogen fluoride, polycyclic compounds, lead, nickel, manganese, polychlorinated biphenyls, and mercury. Copper smelter emissions include arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, manganese, and nickel. Lead smelters typically emit arsenic, antimony, cadmium, and various lead compounds.
Wastewater
Wastewater pollutants discharged by iron and steel mills includes gasification products such as benzene, naphthalene, anthracene, cyanide, ammonia, phenols, and cresols, together with a range of more complex organic compounds known collectively as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). Treatment technologies include recycling of wastewater; settling basins, clarifiers and filtration systems for solids removal; oil skimmers and filtration; chemical precipitation and filtration for dissolved metals; carbon adsorption and biological oxidation for organic pollutants; and evaporation.
Pollutants generated by other types of smelters varies with the base metal ore. For example, aluminum smelters typically generate fluoride, benzo(a)pyrene, antimony, and nickel, as well as aluminum. Copper smelters typically discharge cadmium, lead, zinc, arsenic, and nickel, in addition to copper. Lead smelters may discharge antimony, asbestos, cadmium, copper, and zinc, in addition to lead.
Health impacts
Labourers working in the smelting industry have reported respiratory illnesses inhibiting their ability to perform the physical tasks demanded by their jobs.
Regulations
In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency has published pollution control regulations for smelters.
Air pollution standards under the Clean Air Act
Water pollution standards (effluent guidelines) under the Clean Water Act.

Smeltmills were water-powered mills used to smelt lead or other metals.
The older method of smelting lead on wind-blown bole hills began to be superseded by artificially-blown smelters. The first such furnace was built by Burchard Kranich at Makeney, Derbyshire in 1554, but produced less good lead than the older bole hill. William Humfrey (the Queen's assay master), and a leading shareholder in the Company of Mineral and Battery Works introduced the ore hearth from the Mendips about 1577. This was initially blown by a foot-blast, but was soon developed into a water-powered smelt mill at Beauchief (now a suburb of Sheffield).
A typical smelt mill had an orehearth and a slaghearth, the latter being used to reprocess slags from the orehearth in order to recover further lead from the slag

Sociedad Minera y Metalúrgica de Peñarroya (in French: Société minière et métallurgique de Peñarroya), usually abbreviated as SMMP, was a French-owned multinational mining company that operated between 1881 and 1989. During its existence it had an important presence in Spain.
Founded in 1881, the company began operations in southern Spain. The company's mining activity was mainly focused on the extraction of coal and lead, although it also reached other industrial fields such as metallurgy, chemical industry, electricity production, railroads, etc. In the case of Spain, it came to control numerous mines and its activity extended throughout the provinces of Cordoba, Jaen, Ciudad Real, Murcia, and Barcelona. In addition to Spain and France, the company was also present in other territories, such as Belgium, Italy, Greece and North Africa.
The decline of the company's activities in Spain began in the 1960s, with the closure of its Peñarroya facilities in 1970. However, some fields were still in operation. In 1968 the Spanish section was restructured and renamed "Sociedad Minera y Metalúrgica de Peñarroya-España" (SMMP-E), a name it kept until its disappearance in 1988–1989.
History
Origins and consolidation
The "Peñarroya" company was founded on October 6, 1881, by the French engineer Charles Ledoux. SMMP was founded in Paris by means of an agreement signed between the House of Rothschild and the French company Sociedad Hullera y Metalúrgica de Belmez (CHMB), the latter already present in the Peñarroya-Belmez-Espiel coal basin. Ledoux was the main architect of the foundation of the company, interested in grouping the different mining interests in the area. Initially, it was agreed that CHMB would continue with its exploitation of the coal basins while SMMP would engage in lead mining and metallurgy. In a short time the activities of the new company grew exponentially, to the point that between 1885 and 1889 lead and silver production tripled. Paradoxically, although the SMMP had originally been founded as a "little sister" of the CHMB, on June 22, 1893, the latter was absorbed by the "Peñarroya" company.
The company's head office was located at 12 Place Vendôme, Paris, although it also had another head office in Peñarroya.
Years of apogee
From the beginning of the 20th century, the company started an important expansion, enlarging its mines and facilities. In 1900 it acquired the mines in the Alto Guadiato valley that were owned by the Compañía de los Ferrocarriles Andaluces, a purchase that was not very costly for SMMP because at that time "Andaluces" was going through a bad economic situation. That same year the company also acquired eight mines scattered in the area of El Terrible and Santa Elisa, one of which would turn out to be of extraordinary mineral wealth. In 1911 it bought again new mining deposits scattered in different areas, thus gaining a dominant position in the market. By that time SMMP was also exploiting mining deposits in the provinces of Badajoz (Azuaga, Fuente del Arco) and Ciudad Real (Puertollano, San Quintín). By 1914, "Peñarroya" had become the second largest coal producer in Spain.
The importance of SMMP was such that a large part of the land in the municipality of Peñarroya was owned by the company, and in fact the company donated some land for the construction of the Civil Guard barracks, the Town Hall, the telephone exchange, etc. The SMMP itself was even in charge of issues such as the municipal water supply. In addition to the mining operations, the company's business in the Peñarroya-Belmez area included a lead smelter, a zinc factory, a sulfuric acid factory, an oleum factory, several thermoelectric production plants, a superphosphate factory, etc.
The production of "Peñarroya" experienced an upward trend during the course of the First World War due to the increase in demand from the belligerent countries, which would lead to a significant increase in its income. In 1917 the SMMP participated together with the Rio Tinto Company Limited and other actors in the foundation of the Sociedad Española de Construcciones Electromecánicas (SECEM), to whose factory in Cordoba the Peñarroya company would supply electric energy. By 1920 the "Peñarroya" company had an estimated capital of 28,430,863 pesetas, at a time when it was one of the main companies operating in Spain. A reflection of this is the fact that the company came to have its own railway network, which connected its main facilities in the provinces of Cordoba and Ciudad Real. In the 1930s, SMMP also started the synthetic production of oil through the distillation of oil shale. It even set up a distillation plant in Puertollano, from whose production up to four million liters of gasoline, 400,000 liters of lubricants and some 1,300 tons of asphalts were obtained at the time.
At the beginning of the 1930s the "Peñarroya" company was at its peak. In 1931 the group's profits in Spanish territory were around twelve million pesetas, largely thanks to the investments made in Spanish companies. But it was also from this date that the company began a policy of diversification and relocation of its facilities to other areas. After the outbreak of the Civil War in 1936, Peñarroya's main facilities were briefly occupied by the trade unions and workers' militias, who made themselves strong in the Guadiato area. This situation was short-lived, as a few months later the rebel army occupied the mining basin and the company regained control of the facilities.
In the 1950s the company acquired the Cartagena-La Unión facilities, reactivating the mining production in the area, although "Peñarroya" was already a shareholder of the parent company that operated the mines. Under the aegis of the SMMP, the construction of the "Roberto" washery began in 1952, and modern machinery was introduced for the mining works. The mines in the area experienced a boom period thanks to the mechanization of the workings, reaching high productivity and yields. Between 1957 and 1980, lead production increased fourfold, while silver production increased threefold. The main activities would end up being concentrated in the "Santa Lucía" smelter, whose facilities underwent a complete modernization between 1966 and 1970. "Santa Lucía" became the largest lead smelter in Spain and the second largest in Europe, accounting for 66% of Spanish lead production in the 1970s.
Multinational company
Throughout its existence, SMMP's activities spread throughout Europe, Africa and South America, giving rise to a multinational company.
In metropolitan France, the first operations were quite late compared to its activities in Spain. In 1917 "Peñarroya" obtained the concession of the lead deposits of Pierrefitte, in the department of Hautes-Pyrénées, but the works would not start until 1940. A similar situation occurred at the mines of La Plagne, in the Haute-Savoie region, and Orb, in Vaucluse. The three mines remained active with various vicissitudes until 1969, 1973 and 1954, respectively. The fields in the Largentière district in Ardèche, which were in operation from 1964 to 1988 with high productivity, performed better. In addition to Spain, within the Mediterranean basin, the "Peñarroya" company also developed its activities in Greece and Italy. In Greece it exploited the famous Laurion mines through a subsidiary, the Compagnie française du Laurium, from the 19th century until its closure in 1977. In the case of Italy, for many years the Sardinian mines were the main center of activity of SMMP in the country. Later the French company would operate through a subsidiary, Pertrusola, which throughout the 1960s and 1970s exploited various deposits throughout the peninsula: the mines of Raibl (Udine), Salafossa (Piave), Crotona (Calabria) and Vado Ligure (Liguria).
In Africa, SMMP had an intense geological research activity in several countries, especially in Morocco, where several deposits, smelters, washing plants, etc. were in operation. From 1950 onwards it associated with other companies to exploit several mines, maintaining its activities in the Maghreb country until 1975. "Peñarroya was also active in South America since 1950, mainly in Chile and Brazil. In the Andean country it became associated in 1951 with the mining company of M'Zaita, of French capital, which it absorbed in 1960. Its activities were concentrated around the La Disputada and El Soldado mines, as well as the Chagres smelter, working mainly copper. The deposits and facilities were unified under a single subsidiary, the company "Disputada", which remained under the control of SMMP until the early 1970s. In Brazil, it assumed the technical management of several mining operations and came to own two smelters.
Decline and disappearance
By the end of the 1950s, SMMP's activities in the Peñarroya-Belmez area were in decline. Previously, during the post-war years, "Peñarroya" had ceded to Empresa Nacional Calvo Sotelo (ENCASO) its oil shale exploitations in the Puertollano area. In 1961, the SMMP transferred the ownership of the coal basins of Peñarroya-Belmez and Puertollano to the Instituto Nacional de Industria (INI), after having announced its intention to cease its activities in this sector. In 1961 it created the companies ENCASUR and ENECO with the objective of producing electricity based on local coal. At the beginning, SMMP had a 17% shareholding in ENCASUR. In 1968 all the Spanish businesses of "Peñarroya" adopted their own entity and were renamed "Sociedad Minera y Metalúrgica de Peñarroya-España" (SMMP-E), having from then on its headquarters in Madrid and having a separate organization. These changes were similar to those operating in the French metropolis, since in 1974 the "Peñarroya" company joined other historic French mining companies —Le Nickel and Mokta— to form the Imétal conglomerate.
In 1970 the Peñarroya-Pueblonuevo facilities were closed and abandoned. By 1980 SMMP-E maintained its main activity in the Sierra Minera de Cartagena-La Unión, which by then had become Spain's leading lead producing center. But by the end of the 1980s, the mining crisis and the accumulation of losses led the historic company to an unsustainable situation. In 1988, the Imétal conglomerate was eventually integrated into the new Metaleurop group. The parent company decided to liquidate a large part of its Spanish division. In 1988 the Cartagena mining facilities were sold to a real estate developer, Portmán Golf, which would end up closing the mines in 1991.
Railway network and equipment
During the first third of the 20th century, SMMP owned mining deposits and installations that extended throughout the regions of Peñarroya-Belmez, Horcajo and Puertollano. For this reason, the company built a railroad from Peñarroya to Fuente del Arco and Puertollano, with a length of 216 kilometers. Another railroad line was also built to the San Quintín mines. With this, all the company's mining sites were connected by railroad. In 1924 SMMP transferred the control and administration of the railway network to Compañía de los Ferrocarriles de Peñarroya y Puertollano, a subsidiary of SMMP.
In order to operate all this network of lines, the company "Peñarroya" had a large fleet of narrow-gauge vehicles and engines. It also had a fleet of broad gauge locomotives to operate on the branches that connected its different deposits and industrial exploitations with the Iberian-gauge railway network. The main traffic of its lines was the transport of goods, especially minerals, although it also offered passenger services.

Softwood is wood from gymnosperm trees such as conifers. The term is opposed to hardwood, which is the wood from angiosperm trees. The main differences between hardwoods and softwoods is that the softwoods completely lack vessels (pores). The main softwood species (pines, spruces, larches, false tsugas) also have resin canals (or ducts) in their structure.
Characteristics
Softwood is wood from gymnosperm trees such as pines and spruces. Softwoods are not necessarily softer than hardwoods. The hardest hardwoods are much harder than any softwood, but in both groups there is enormous variation with the range of wood hardness of the two groups overlapping. For example, balsa wood, which is a hardwood, is softer than most softwoods, whereas the longleaf pine, Douglas fir, and yew softwoods are much harder than several hardwoods.
Several specific natural, macroscopic and microscopic features of wood are used in the identification process of a softwood species.
Softwoods are generally most used by the construction industry and are also used to produce paper pulp, and card products. In many of these applications, there is a constant need for density and thickness monitoring and gamma-ray sensors have shown good performance in this case.
Certain species of softwood are more resistant to insect attack from woodworm, as certain insects prefer damp hardwood.
Examples of softwood trees and uses
Douglas fir - joinery, doors and heavy construction
Eastern white pine - furniture
European spruce - used throughout construction, panelling and cladding
Larch - cladding and boats
Lodgepole pine - roofing, flooring and in making chipboard and particle board
Monterey pine
Parana pine - stair treads and joinery (critically endangered)
Scots pine - construction industry, mostly for interior work
Sitka spruce
Southern yellow pine - joinery, flooring and decking
Western hemlock - doors, joinery and furniture
Western red cedar (or red cedar) - furniture, decking, cladding, and roof shingles
Yew - interior and exterior furniture (e.g., chairs, gate posts and wood turning)
Applications
Softwood is the source of about 70% of the world's annual production of lumber, with traditional centers of production being mainly the US and Canada, Russia, China, Germany, and Scandinavia. Softwood is typically used in construction as structural carcassing timber, as well as finishing timber.

Soil and Water Bioengineering is a discipline of civil engineering. It pursues technological, ecological, economic as well as design goals and seeks to achieve these primarily by making use of living materials, i.e. seeds, plants, part of plants and plant communities, and employing them in near–natural constructions while exploiting the manifold abilities inherent in plants.
Soil bioengineering may sometimes be a substitute for classical engineering works; however, in most cases it is a meaningful and necessary method of complementing the latter.
Its application suggests itself in all fields of soil and hydraulic engineering, especially for slope and embankment stabilization and erosion control.
Soil bioengineering, also called ground bioengineering, is the use of living plant materials to provide some engineering function. Soil bioengineering is an effective tool for treatment of a variety of unstable and/or eroding sites. Soil bioengineering techniques have been used for many centuries. More recently Schiechtl (1980) has encouraged the use of soil bioengineering with a variety of European examples. Soil bioengineering is now widely practiced throughout the world for the treatment of erosion and unstable slopes.
Fields of application and plants for soil bioengineering control works
Soil bioengineering methods can be applied wherever the plants which are used as living building materials are able to grow well and develop. This is the case in tropical, subtropical and temperate zones whereas there are obvious limits to plant growth in dry and cold regions, i.e. where arid, semi–arid and frost zones prevail. In exceptional cases, lack of water may be compensated for by watering or irrigation. In Europe, dry conditions limiting application exist in the Mediterranean as well as in some inner alpine and eastern European snowy regions. However, limits are most frequently imposed in alpine and arctic regions. These can usually be clearly noticed by the limited growth of woody plants (forest, tree and shrub lines) and the upper limits of closed turf cover. The more impoverished a region is in species, the less suited it is for the application of bioengineering methods.
Functions and effects of soil bioengineering structures
Technical functions
protection of soil surface from erosion by wind, precipitation, frost and flowing water
protection from rock fall
elimination or binding of destructive mechanical forces
reduction of flow velocity along banks
surface and/or deep soil cohesion and stabilization
drainage
protection from wind
aiding the deposition of snow, drift sand and sediments
increasing soil roughness and thus preventing avalanche release
Apart from these, ecological functions are gaining in importance, particularly as these can be fulfilled to a very limited extent only by classical engineering constructions.
Ecological functions
addressing climate change challenges
improvement of water regime by improved soil interception and storage capability as well as water consumption by plants
soil drainage
protection from wind
protection from ambient air pollution
mechanical soil amelioration by the roots of plants
balancing of temperature conditions in near–ground layers of air and in the soil
shading
improvement of nutrient content in the soil and thus of soil fertility on previously raw soils
balancing of snow deposits
noise control
yield increase on neighbouring cropland
Landscaping functions
healing of wounds inflicted on the landscape by disasters (e.g. landslides, wildfires, hurricanes) and humans (e.g. exploitation of mineral resources, construction work, deposition of overburden, tunnel excavation material, industrial and domestic waste)
integration of structures into the landscape (e.g. through landscaping)
concealment of offending structures
enrichment of the landscape by creating new features and structures, shapes and colours of vegetation
Economic effects
Bioengineering control works are not always necessarily cheaper in construction when compared to classical engineering structures. However, when taking into account their lifetime including their service and maintenance, they will normally turn out to be more economical. Their special advantages are:
lower construction costs compared to “hard” constructions
lower maintenance and rehabilitation costs (higher useful life)
creation of useful green areas and woody plant populations on previously derelict land
Useful for income generation
The result of soil bioengineering protection works are living systems which develop further and maintain their balance by natural succession (i.e. by dynamic self–control, without artificial input of energy). If the right living but also non–living building materials and the appropriate types of construction are chosen, exceptionally high sustainability requiring little maintenance effort can be achieved.

A solar still distills water with substances dissolved in it by using the heat of the Sun to evaporate water so that it may be cooled and collected, thereby purifying it. They are used in areas where drinking water is unavailable, so that clean water is obtained from dirty water or from plants by exposing them to sunlight.
Still types include large scale concentrated solar stills and condensation traps. In a solar still, impure water is contained outside the collector, where it is evaporated by sunlight shining through a transparent collector. The pure water vapour condenses on the cool inside surface and drips into a tank.
Distillation replicates the way nature makes rain. The sun's energy heats water to the point of evaporation. As the water evaporates, its vapour rises, condensing into water again as it cools. This process leaves behind impurities, such as salts and heavy metals, and eliminates microbiological organisms. The result is pure (potable) water.
History
Condensation traps have been in use since the pre-Incan peoples inhabited the Andes.
In 1952, the United States military developed a portable solar still for pilots stranded in the ocean. It featured an inflatable 610-millimetre (24 in) floating plastic ball, with a flexible tube in the side. An inner bag hangs from attachment points on the outer bag. Seawater is poured into the inner bag from an opening in the ball's neck. Fresh water is taken out using the side tube. Output ranged from 1.4 litres (1.5 US qt) to 2.4 litres (2.5 US qt) of fresh water per day. Similar stills are included in some life raft survival kits, though manual reverse osmosis desalinators have mostly replaced them.
Today, a method for gathering water in moisture traps is taught within the Argentinian Army for use by specialist units expected to conduct extended patrols of more than a week's duration in the Andes' arid border areas.
Methods
Pit still
A collector is placed at the bottom of a pit. Branches are placed vertically in the pit. The branches are long enough to extend over the edge of the pit and form a funnel to direct the water into the collector. A lid is then built over this funnel, using more branches, leaves, grasses, etc. Water is collected each morning.
This method relies on the formation of dew or frost on the receptacle, funnel, and lid. Forming dew collects on and runs down the outside of the funnel and into the receptacle. This water would typically evaporate with the morning sun and thus vanish, but the lid traps the evaporating water and raises the humidity within the trap, reducing the amount of lost water. The shade produced by the lid also reduces the temperature within the trap, which further reduces the rate of water loss to evaporation.
A solar still can be constructed with two–four stones, plastic film or transparent glass, a central weight to make the funnel and a container for the condensate. Better materials improve efficiency. A single sheet of plastic can replace the branches and leaves. Greater efficiency arises because the plastic is waterproof, preventing water vapour from escaping. The sheet is attached to the ground on all sides with stones or earth. Weighting the centre of the sheet forms the funnel. Condensate runs down it into the receptacle. One study of pit distillation found that angling the lid at 30 degrees angle captured the most water. The optimal water depth was about 25 millimetres (1 in).
Transpiration
During photosynthesis plants release water through transpiration. Water can be obtained by enclosing a leafy tree branch in clear plastic, capturing water vapour released by the tree. The plastic allows photosynthesis to continue.
In a 2009 study, variations to the angle of plastic and increasing the internal temperature versus the outside temperature improved output volumes.
Unless relieved the vapour pressure around the branch can rise so high that the leaves can no longer transpire, requiring the water to be removed frequently.
Alternatively, clumps of grass or small bushes can be placed inside the bag. The foliage must be replaced at regular intervals, particularly if the foliage is uprooted.
Efficiency is greatest when the bag receives maximum sunshine. Soft, pulpy roots yield the greatest amount of liquid for the least amount of effort.
Wick
The wick type solar still is a vapour-tight glass-topped box with an angled roof. Water is poured in from the top. It is heated by sunlight and evaporates. It condenses on the underside of the glass and runs into the connecting pipe at the bottom. Wicks separate the water into banks to increase surface area. The more wicks, the more heat reaches the water.
To aid in absorbing more heat, wicks can be blackened. Glass absorbs less heat than plastic at higher temperatures, although glass is not as flexible.
A plastic net can catch the water before it falls into the container and give it more time to heat.
Additives
When distilling brine or other polluted water, adding a dye can increase the amount of solar radiation absorbed.
Reverse still
A reverse still uses the temperature difference between solar-heated ambient air and the device to condense ambient water vapour. One such device produces water without external power. It features an inverted cone on top to deflect ambient heat in the air, and to keep sunlight off the upper surface of the box. This surface is a sheet of glass coated with multiple layers of a polymer and silver.
It reflects sunlight to reduce surface heating. Residual heat that is not reflected is reemitted in a specific (infrared) wavelength so that it passes through the atmosphere into space. The box can be as much as 15 °C (27 °F) cooler than the ambient temperature. That stimulates condensation, which gathers on the ceiling. This ceiling is coated in a superhydrophobic material, so that the condensate forms into droplets and falls into a collector. A test system yielded 4.6 ml (0.16 US fl oz) of water per day, using a 10 cm (3.9 in) surface or approximately 1.3 L/m2 (0.28 gal/ft2) per day.
Inclined solar still
An inclined solar still operates by allowing short-wave solar radiation to pass through a transparent glass plate while trapping the long-wave radiation emitted by the heated sand and water inside the still. This trapped heat raises the water temperature, increasing the evaporation rate. The resulting water vapor condenses on the inner surface of the glass plate and is collected using a channel. This type of still is utilized to produce potable water from brackish sources and to examine its effectiveness for defluoridation. A variation of this method, known as earth–water distillation, involves using wet sand or soil to extract water in arid regions. Sand is used within the inclined still to retain a stable water layer, preventing overflow. Without sand, feed water would spill over if its free surface height exceeded that of the collection channel.
Efficiency
Condensation traps are sources for extending or supplementing existing water sources or supplies. A trap measuring 40 cm (16 in) in diameter by 30 cm (12 in) deep yields around 100 to 150 mL (3.4 to 5.1 US fl oz) per day.
Urinating into the pit before adding the receptacle allows some of the urine's water content to be recovered.
A pit still may be too inefficient as a survival still, because of the energy/water required for construction. In desert environments water needs can exceed 3.8 litres (1 US gal) per day for a person at rest, while still production may average only 240 millilitres (8 US fl oz). Several days of water collection may be required to equal the water lost during construction.
Applications
Remote sites
Solar stills are used in cases where rain, piped, or well water is impractical, such as in remote homes or during power outages. In subtropical hurricane target areas that can lose power for days, solar distillation can provide an alternative source of clean water.
Solar-powered desalination systems can be installed in remote locations where there is little or no infrastructure or energy grid. Solar is still affordable, eco-friendly, and considered an effective method amongst other conventional distillation techniques. Solar still is very effective, especially for supplying fresh water for islanders. This makes them ideal for use in rural areas or developing countries where access to clean water is limited.
Survival
Solar stills have been used by ocean-stranded pilots and included in life raft emergency kits.
Using a condensation trap to distill urine will remove the urea and salt, recycling the body's water.
Wastewater treatment
Solar stills have also been used for the treatment of municipal wastewater, the dewatering of sewage sludge as well as for olive mill wastewater management.
Ion occurrence mechanism in distilled water from a solar still
Research indicates that ions such as F⁻ and NO−3 can be present in distillates from solar stills. Imaging and distillation experiments were performed to investigate this phenomenon. White dots were observed in the vapor space above the interface of hot water poured into containers. The concentrations of ions such as F⁻ and SO2−4 in distillates from both thermal and solar distillation experiments were found to be similar when using deionized water as well as fluoride solutions with concentrations of 100 and 10,000 mg/L. These findings suggest that aerosols enter the distillation system through leaks, acting as nuclei for water vapor condensation. The water-soluble components of aerosols dissolve in the forming droplets, some of which are carried into the distillate by buoyancy-driven convection.
Benefits and Disadvantages
Benefits
Utilizes free solar energy
Simple design
Low operational Cost
Improved water quality
Adaptable
Disadvantages
Very slow process
Does not kill bacteria
Larger space required
Only works well in the presence of sunlight

Solar water disinfection, in short SODIS, is a type of portable water purification that uses solar energy to make biologically contaminated (e.g. bacteria, viruses, protozoa and worms) water safe to drink. Water contaminated with non-biological agents such as toxic chemicals or heavy metals require additional steps to make the water safe to drink.
Solar water disinfection is usually accomplished using some mix of electricity generated by photovoltaics panels (solar PV), heat (solar thermal), and solar ultraviolet light collection.
Solar disinfection using the effects of electricity generated by photovoltaics typically uses an electric current to deliver electrolytic processes which disinfect water, for example by generating oxidative free radicals which kill pathogens by damaging their chemical structure. A second approach uses stored solar electricity from a battery, and operates at night or at low light levels to power an ultraviolet lamp to perform secondary solar ultraviolet water disinfection.
Solar thermal water disinfection uses heat from the sun to heat water to 70–100 °C for a short period of time. A number of approaches exist. Solar heat collectors can have lenses in front of them, or use reflectors. They may also use varying levels of insulation or glazing. In addition, some solar thermal water disinfection processes are batch-based, while others (through-flow solar thermal disinfection) operate almost continuously while the sun shines. Water heated to temperatures below 100 °C is generally referred to as pasteurized water.
The ultraviolet part of sunlight can also kill pathogens in water. The SODIS method uses a combination of UV light and increased temperature (solar thermal) for disinfecting water using only sunlight and repurposed PET plastic bottles. SODIS is a free and effective method for decentralized water treatment, usually applied at the household level and is recommended by the World Health Organization as a viable method for household water treatment and safe storage. SODIS is already applied in numerous developing countries. Educational pamphlets on the method are available in many languages, each equivalent to the English-language version.
Process for household application
Guides for the household use of SODIS describe the process.
Colourless, transparent PET water or soda bottles of 2-litre or smaller size with few surface scratches are selected for use. Glass bottles are also suitable. Any labels are removed and the bottles are washed before the first use. Water from possibly contaminated sources is filled into the bottles, using the clearest water possible. Where the turbidity is higher than 30 NTU it is necessary to filter or precipitate out particulates prior to exposure to the sunlight.
Filters are locally made from cloth stretched over inverted bottles with the bottoms cut off. In order to improve oxygen saturation, the guides recommend that bottles be filled three-quarters, shaken for 20 seconds (with the cap on), then filled completely, recapped, and checked for clarity.
The filled bottles are then exposed to the fullest sunlight possible. Bottles will heat faster and hotter if they are placed on a sloped sun-facing reflective metal surface. A corrugated metal roof (as compared to a thatched roof) or a slightly curved sheet of aluminum foil increases the light inside the bottle. Overhanging structures or plants that shade the bottles must be avoided, as they reduce both illumination and heating. After sufficient time, the treated water can be consumed directly from the bottle or poured into clean drinking cups. The risk of re-contamination is minimized if the water is stored in the bottles. Refilling and storage in other containers increases the risk of contamination.
The most favorable regions for application of the SODIS method are located between latitude 15°N and 35°N, and also 15°S and 35°S. These regions have high levels of solar radiation, with limited cloud cover and rainfall, and with over 90% of sunlight reaching the earth's surface as direct radiation. The second most favorable region lies between latitudes 15°N and 15°S. these regions have high levels of scattered radiation, with about 2500 hours of sunshine annually, due to high humidity and frequent cloud cover.
Local education in the use of SODIS is important to avoid confusion between PET and other bottle materials. Applying SODIS without proper assessment (or with false assessment) of existing hygienic practices and diarrhea incidence may not address other routes of infection. Community trainers must themselves be trained first.
Applications
SODIS is an effective method for treating water where fuel or cookers are unavailable or prohibitively expensive. Even where fuel is available, SODIS is a more economical and environmentally friendly option. The application of SODIS is limited if enough bottles are not available, or if the water is highly turbid. In fact, if the water is highly turbid, SODIS cannot be used alone; additional filtering is then necessary.
A basic field test to determine if the water is too turbid for the SODIS method to work properly is the newspaper test. For the newspaper test the user has to place the filled bottle upright on top of a newspaper headline and look down through the bottle opening. If the letters of the headline are readable, the water can be used for the SODIS method. If the letters are not readable then the turbidity of the water likely exceeds 30 NTU, and the water must be pretreated.
In theory, the method could be used in disaster relief or refugee camps. However, supplying bottles may be more difficult than providing equivalent disinfecting tablets containing chlorine, bromine, or iodine. In addition, in some circumstances, it may be difficult to guarantee that the water will be left in the sun for the necessary time.
Other methods for household water treatment and safe storage exist, including chlorination, flocculation/disinfection, and various filtration procedures. The method should be chosen based on the criteria of effectiveness, the co-occurrence of other types of pollution (e.g. turbidity, chemical pollutants), treatment costs, labor input and convenience, and the user's preference.
When the water is highly turbid, SODIS cannot be used alone; additional filtering or flocculation is then necessary to clarify the water prior to SODIS treatment. Recent work has shown that common table salt (NaCl) is an effective flocculation agent for decreasing turbidity for the SODIS method in some types of soil. This method could be used to increase the geographic areas for which the SODIS method could be used as regions with highly turbid water could be treated for low costs.
SODIS may alternatively be implemented using plastic bags. SODIS bags have been found to yield as much as 74% higher treatment efficiencies than SODIS bottles, which may be because the bags are able to reach elevated temperatures that cause accelerated treatment. SODIS bags with a water layer of approximately 1 cm to 6 cm reach higher temperatures more easily than SODIS bottles, and treat Vibrio cholerae more effectively. It is assumed this is because of the improved surface area to volume ratio in SODIS bags. In remote regions plastic bottles are not locally available and need to be shipped in from urban centers which may be expensive and inefficient since bottles cannot be packed very tightly. Bags can be packed more densely than bottles, and can be shipped at lower cost, representing an economically preferable alternative to SODIS bottles in remote communities. The disadvantages of using bags are that they can give the water a plastic smell, they are more difficult to handle when filled with water, and they typically require that the water be transferred to a second container for drinking.
Another important benefit in using the SODIS bottles as opposed to the bags or other methods requiring the water to be transferred to a smaller container for consumption is that the bottles are a point-of-use household water treatment method. Point-of-use means that the water is treated in the same easy to handle container it will be served from, thus decreasing the risk of secondary water contamination.
Cautions
If the water bottles are not left in the sun for the proper length of time, the water may not be safe to drink and could cause illness. If the sunlight is less strong, due to overcast weather or a less sunny climate, a longer exposure time in the sun is necessary.
The following issues should also be considered:
Bottle material
Some glass or PVC materials may prevent ultraviolet light from reaching the water. Commercially available bottles made of PET are recommended. The handling is much more convenient in the case of PET bottles. Polycarbonate (resin identification code 7) blocks all UVA and UVB rays, and therefore should not be used. Bottles that are clear are to be preferred over bottles that have been colored, for example green lemon/lime soda pop bottles.
Aging of plastic bottles
SODIS efficiency depends on the physical condition of the plastic bottles, with scratches and other signs of wear reducing the efficiency of SODIS. Heavily scratched or old, blind bottles should be replaced.
Shape of containers
The intensity of the UV radiation decreases rapidly with increasing water depth. At a water depth of 10 cm (4 inches) and moderate turbidity of 26 NTU, UV-A radiation is reduced to 50%. PET soft drink bottles are often easily available and thus most practical for the SODIS application.
Oxygen
Sunlight produces highly reactive forms of oxygen (oxygen free radicals and hydrogen peroxides) in the water. These reactive molecules contribute in the destruction process of the microorganisms. Under normal conditions (rivers, creeks, wells, ponds, tap) water contains sufficient oxygen (more than 3 mg/L of oxygen) and does not have to be aerated before the application of SODIS.
Leaching of bottle material
There has been some concern over the question of whether plastic drinking containers can release chemicals or toxic components into water, a process possibly accelerated by heat. The Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Testing and Research have examined the diffusion of adipates and phthalates (DEHA and DEHP) from new and reused PET-bottles in the water during solar exposure. The levels of concentrations found in the water after a solar exposure of 17 hours in 60 °C (140 °F) water were far below WHO guidelines for drinking water and in the same magnitude as the concentrations of phthalate and adipate generally found in high-quality tap water. Concerns about the general use of PET-bottles were also expressed after a report published by researchers from the University of Heidelberg on the release of antimony from PET-bottles for soft drinks and mineral water stored over several months in supermarkets. However, the antimony concentrations found in the bottles are orders of magnitude below WHO and national guidelines for antimony concentrations in drinking water. Furthermore, SODIS water is not stored over such extended periods in the bottles.
Regrowth of bacteria
Once removed from sunlight, remaining bacteria may again reproduce in the dark. A 2010 study showed that adding just 10 parts per million of hydrogen peroxide is effective in preventing the regrowth of wild Salmonella.
Toxic chemicals
Solar water disinfection does not remove toxic chemicals that may be present in the water, such as factory waste.
Health impact, diarrhea reduction
According to the World Health Organization, more than two million people per year die of preventable water-borne diseases, and one billion people lack access to a source of improved drinking water.
It has been shown that the SODIS method (and other methods of household water treatment) can very effectively remove pathogenic contamination from the water. However, infectious diseases are also transmitted through other pathways, i.e. due to a general lack of sanitation and hygiene. Studies on the reduction of diarrhea among SODIS users show reduction values of 30–80%.
Research
The effectiveness of the SODIS was first discovered by Aftim Acra, of the American University of Beirut in the early 1980s. Follow-up was conducted by the research groups of Martin Wegelin at the Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (EAWAG) and Kevin McGuigan at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. Clinical control trials were pioneered by Ronan Conroy of the RCSI team in collaboration with Michael Elmore-Meegan.
A joint research project on SODIS was implemented by the following institutions:
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI), Ireland (coordination)
University of Ulster (UU), United Kingdom
CSIR Environmentek, South Africa, EAWAG, Switzerland
The Institute of Water and Sanitation Development (IWSD), Zimbabwe
Plataforma Solar de Almería (CIEMAT-PSA), Spain
University of Leicester (UL), United Kingdom
The International Commission for the Relief of Suffering and Starvation (ICROSS), Kenya
University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain
Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (Eawag), Switzerland
The project embarked on a multi-country study including study areas in Zimbabwe, South Africa and Kenya.
Other developments include a continuous flow disinfection unit and solar disinfection with titanium dioxide film over glass cylinders, which prevents the bacterial regrowth of coliforms after SODIS.
Research has shown that a number of low-cost additives are capable of accelerating SODIS and that additives might make SODIS more rapid and effective in both sunny and cloudy weather, developments that could help make the technology more effective and acceptable to users. A 2008 study showed that powdered seeds of five natural legumes (peas, beans and lentils)—Vigna unguiculata (cowpea), Phaseolus mungo (black lentil), Glycine max (soybean), Pisum sativum (green pea), and Arachis hypogaea (peanut)—when evaluated as natural flocculants for the removal of turbidity, were as effective as commercial alum and even superior for clarification in that the optimum dosage was low (1 g/L), flocculation was rapid (7–25 minutes, depending on the seed used) and the water hardness and pH was essentially unaltered. Later studies have used chestnuts, oak acorns, and Moringa oleifera (drumstick tree) for the same purpose.
Other research has examined the use of doped semiconductors to increase the production of oxygen radicals under solar UV-A. Recently, researchers at the National Centre for Sensor Research and the Biomedical Diagnostics Institute at Dublin City University have developed an inexpensive printable UV dosimeter for SODIS applications that can be read using a mobile phone. The camera of the phone is used to acquire an image of the sensor and custom software running on the phone analyses the sensor colour to provide a quantitative measurement of UV dose.
In isolated regions the effect of wood smoke increases lung disease, due to the constant need for building fires to boil water and cook. Research groups have found that boiling of water is neglected due to the difficulty of gathering wood, which is scarce in many areas. When presented with basic household water treatment options, residents in isolated regions in Africa have shown a preference for the SODIS method over boiling or other basic water treatment methods.
A very simple solar water purifier for rural households has been developed which uses 4 layers of saree cloth and solar tubular collectors to remove all coliforms.
In July 2020 researchers reported the development of a reusable aluminium surface for efficient solar-based water sanitation to below the WHO and EPA standards for drinkable water.
Promotion
The Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (EAWAG), through the Department of Water and Sanitation in Developing Countries (Sandec), coordinates SODIS promotion projects in 33 countries including Bhutan, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, DR Congo, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Laos, Malawi, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Perú, Philippines, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Togo, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
SODIS projects are funded by, among others, the SOLAQUA Foundation, several Lions Clubs, Rotary Clubs, Migros, and the Michel Comte Water Foundation.
SODIS has also been applied in several communities in Brazil, one of them being Prainha do Canto Verde, Beberibe west of Fortaleza. Villagers there using the SODIS method have been quite successful, since the temperature during the day can go beyond 40 °C (104 °F) and there is a limited amount of shade.
One of the most important things to consider for public health workers reaching out to communities in need of suitable, cost efficient, and sustainable water treatment methods is teaching the importance of water quality in the context of health promotion and disease prevention while educating about the methods themselves. Although skepticism has posed a challenge in some communities to adopt SODIS and other household water treatment methods for daily use, disseminating knowledge on the important health benefits associated with these methods will likely increase adoption rates.

Spent Potlining (SPL) is a waste material generated in the primary aluminium smelting industry. Spent Potlining is also known as Spent Potliner and Spent Cell Liner.
Primary aluminium smelting is the process of extracting aluminium from aluminium oxide (also known as alumina). The process takes place in electrolytic cells that are known as pots. The pots are made up of steel shells with two linings, an outer insulating or refractory lining and an inner carbon lining that acts as the cathode of the electrolytic cell. During the operation of the cell, substances, including aluminium and fluorides, are absorbed into the cell lining. After some years of operation, the pot lining fails and is removed. The removed material is spent potlining (SPL). SPL was listed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in 1988 as a hazardous waste.
Hazardous properties of SPL are:
Toxic fluoride and cyanide compounds that are leachable in water
Corrosive - exhibiting high pH due to alkali metals and oxides
Reactive with water - producing inflammable, toxic and explosive gases.
The toxic, corrosive and reactive nature of SPL means that particular care must be taken in its handling, transportation and storage. SPL from aluminium reduction cell cathodes is becoming one of the aluminium industry's major environmental concerns. On the other hand, it also represents a major recovery potential because of its fluoride and energy content.
Most SPL is currently stored at the aluminium smelter sites or placed in landfills. Dissolved fluorides and cyanides from SPL that are placed in landfills, along with other leachates may have environmental impacts. Environmentally safe storage methods include secure landfills or permanent storage buildings. However, many of the environmentally safe solutions are expensive and may develop unforeseen problems in the future.
Background
Production of primary aluminium metal with the Hall–Héroult process involves the electrolytic reduction of alumina in cells or pots. The electrolyte is made up of molten cryolite and other additives. The electrolyte is contained in a carbon and refractory lining in a steel potshell. The pots typically have a life of 2 to 6 years. Eventually the cell fails and the potlining (SPL) is removed and replaced. The SPL generated is listed by various environmental bodies as hazardous waste. Due to the concentrations of fluorides and cyanides in spent potlining, and the tendency to leach in contact with water, the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) listed the materials on 13 September 1988 (53 Fed. Reg. 35412) as a hazardous waste (K088) under 40 C.F.R., Part 261, Subpart D. International shipment of SPL is subject to the protocols of the Basel Convention on the Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal. As the environmental regulation agencies in an increasing number of countries define SPL as a hazardous material, the disposal costs can easily run to more than $1000 per tonne SPL.
World production of primary aluminium was 67 million tonnes in 2021. The world's aluminium smelters also produce about 1.6 million tonnes of toxic SPL waste. Past industry practice has been to landfill this waste. This must change if the aluminium industry wants to claim a reasonable degree of sustainability and environmentally tolerable emissions. Landfill of unreacted SPL is considered a practice of the past.
Chemical Properties of SPL
There is variation in composition of SPL depending on such factors as the type of aluminium smelting technology used, the initial components of the cell lining and dismantling procedures. Indicative composition of SPL for three different technologies is shown in the following table.
SPL is hazardous due to:
Toxicity from fluoride and cyanide compounds that are leachable in water
Corrosive - exhibiting high pH due to alkali metals and oxides
Reactive with water in a way that produces inflammable, toxic and explosive gases.
An example of the potential consequences of SPL reaction with water is the death of two workers and reported damage costs of $30 million due to an explosion of flammable gases from SPL in the hold of a cargo ship.
The leachable fluorides in SPL come from the cryolite (Na3AlF6) and sodium fluoride (NaF) that are used as a flux in the smelting process.
Cyanide compounds form in the pot lining when nitrogen from air reacts with other substances. For example, nitrogen reacting with sodium and carbon according to the equation -
1.5N2 + 3Na + 3C → 3NaCN.
Aluminium carbide forms in the potlining from the reaction of aluminium and carbon according to the equation –
4Al + 3C → Al4C3.
Aluminium nitride forms from a number of reactions including the reaction of cryolite with nitrogen and sodium according to the equation -
Na3AlF6 + 0.5N2 + 3Na → AlN + 6NaF
Gases are generated from reactions of water with compounds such as un-oxidised aluminium, un-oxidised sodium metal, aluminium carbide and aluminium nitride. Typical gases from the reaction of SPL with water are:
Hydrogen from aluminium and water – 2Al + 3H20 → 3H2 + Al2O3
Hydrogen from sodium metal and water – 2Na + 2H20 → H2 + 2NaOH
Methane from aluminium carbide and water - Al4C3 + 6H20 → 3CH4 + 2Al2O3
Ammonia from aluminium nitride and water – 2AlN + 3H20 → 2NH3 + Al2O3n
Toxicity of SPL
A number of research studies
included biological tests to evaluate the toxicity of SPL on plants and humans. Aluminium, cyanide and fluoride salts were identified as the major toxic agents in SPL. The genotoxic potential of SPL and its main chemical components was evaluated on vegetal and human cells. Observed effects on vegetal cells included reduction in mitotic index and an increase in the frequency of chromosome alterations. Fluoride was the main genotoxic component for human leukocytes.
The observed effects induced by SPL suggest its mutagenic potential on plant and animal cells, confirming its noxiousness to the environment and human beings.
The studies consistently recommend that handling measures and appropriate disposal of SPL are extremely important and indispensable to avoid its dispersion to the environment and that the storage and disposal of SPL should be supervised closely in order to reduce the risk.
Issues with Landfilling SPL
Past practices for dealing with Spent Potlining (SPL) include dumping it in rivers or in the sea or storing it in open dumps or landfilling. These methods are not environmentally acceptable because of the leachability of cyanides and fluorides. More recently SPL has been stored in secure landfills where it is placed on an impermeable base and covered with an impermeable cap. The amount of detailed information available on the quality of percolate from existing SPL landfills is very limited.
A particular problem with SPL in landfills is the long-term liabilities that result from limited effective life of landfills based on current technology when compared with the long-lived contaminating properties of SPL.
Lee and Jones-Lee describe the evolution and technical aspects of “dry-tomb” landfilling and why they consider it a seriously flawed technology citing problems such as:
eventual failure of composite liner systems
failure of cover systems to prevent ingress of water
low probability of ground water monitoring systems to detect polluted leachate
inadequate post closure funding and management arrangements.
A 2004 study of a landfill containing SPL located in North America identified four chemical species as priority contaminants: cyanide, fluoride, iron and aluminium. Life-cycle assessment and ground water transport modelling were used to provide an understanding of the situation identifying environmental issues and significant ecotoxilogical potential impacts. The study observed that, while assumptions that the confinement of soil and waste was assumed to be perfect, in fact these sites could themselves become sources of contamination. The study states that the most advantageous option is the total destruction of the SPL fraction if concerns about the quality of long term confinement are considered. The major objection to the sealed type of disposal is that it will need to be monitored indefinitely. There is, therefore, a real need to find safe, acceptable alternative ways to landfill disposal.
SPL was dumped by previous owners in an unlined waste repository at the Kurri Kurri smelter in Australia resulting in contamination of the local groundwater aquifer with high levels of fluoride, cyanide, sodium sulphate and chloride.
An Interim Action conducted under Agreed Order No. DE-5698 between the Port of Tacoma and the Washington State Department of Ecology addresses the removal, through excavation and offsite disposal, of SPL zone material and associated contaminated soil at an old aluminium smelter site. The background to this situation is that from 1941 to 1947, the US Department of Defense built and operated an aluminum smelter at the Site. In 1947, Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical Corporation (Kaiser Aluminum) purchased the Site and operated the aluminum production facility until 2001. In 2002, Kaiser Aluminum closed the plant and, in 2003, the Port of Tacoma purchased the smelter property from Kaiser Aluminum for redevelopment.
SPL Treatment Options
A number of alternatives have been proposed for treatment of SPL. The alternatives can be classified as follows:
disposal techniques where all or part of the SPL is destroyed or utilized by another industry including:
combustion for power generation
slag additives in iron and steel industry
fuel and mineral supplement in cement manufacture
red brick industry
conversion to inert landfill materials
recovery or recycling techniques where some of the SPL can be recovered for use in primary aluminium smelting:
fluoride recovery from leaching processes
pyrohydrolysis
pyrosulfolysis
silicopyrohydrolysis
graphite recovery
cathode carbon additives
anode carbon additives
selective recovery of aluminium.
Recycling through other industries is an attractive and proven option; however, classification of SPL as a hazardous waste has greatly discouraged other industries from utilizing SPL, due to the burdensome and expensive environmental regulations. The Arkansas Pollution Control and Ecology Commission noted that treated SPL used to construct roads was recovered and placed in secure landfill.

A spruce is a tree of the genus Picea, a genus of some 37 species of coniferous evergreen trees in the family Pinaceae, found in the northern temperate and boreal (taiga) regions of the Northern Hemisphere. Picea is treated either in the subfamily Pinoideae, or the sole genus in its own subfamily Piceoideae.
Spruces can be distinguished from other genera of the family Pinaceae by their needles (leaves), which are four-sided and attached singly to small persistent peg-like structures (pulvini) on the twigs. The needles are shed when 4–10 years old, leaving the twigs rough with the retained pegs. Pests of spruce forestry include green spruce aphid, eastern spruce budworm, European spruce bark beetle, and great spruce bark beetle.
Spruce is a major producer of timber for construction, and of pulp for paper. It is the standard material for the soundboards of stringed instruments like acoustic guitars. Native Americans use the roots of some species for weaving baskets. The Norway spruce is widely used for Christmas trees. Artists including Augustin Hirschvogel in the 16th century, Edvard Munch around 1900, and Eija-Liisa Ahtila in the 21st century have depicted spruces in etchings, oil paintings, and video installations.
Etymology
The scientific name derives from Latin "pix", pitch, which was obtained from the resin of Picea abies. Spruce, from Middle English spruse or Sprws appears originally to have denoted goods, including wooden objects, imported from Prussia. The Middle English word is in turn from Old French Pruce, "Prussia".
Description
Spruces differ from other Pinaceae in two distinctive characters. Firstly, they have a pulvinus (plural, pulvini), a small peg-like structure at the base of each needle, that remains when the needle falls. Secondly, they have evergreen needle-like leaves that are more or less square in cross-section. The needles stay on the tree for between four and ten years.
The tree usually has a straight trunk, though can become bushy or irregular if damaged by wind exposure or biotic factors like browsing or insect damage. Spruces are resinous, and monoecious, with separate male and female cones on the same tree. Young trees have a conical crown; in older trees, this tends to become a roughly cylindrical column; mature heights vary from 10–20 m in the smaller species like Picea mariana, up to a maximum of 100 m in Picea sitchensis. Branches grow from the trunk in regular whorls; the lower branches are mostly soon lost, except when the tree is open-grown in full sun. Young branches rise above the horizontal, but older branches do not. The needles range from 0.6–0.8 cm in Picea orientalis up to 3.5–5 cm in Picea smithiana. The cones have leaflike bracts that appear at the time of pollination, but unlike Abies (fir cones), these are generally later covered by the seed scales. When mature, the cones range from 2–3.5 cm in Picea mariana, up to 10–20 cm in Picea abies, and nearly as long but stouter and heavier, in Picea smithiana. Each seed sits with its lower half in a cup on the seed scale; the seeds have a large wing.
The structure of the cone scales, including length, width, immature colour, shape of the apex, and how much of the scale is free, is the most useful feature for identifying species of spruce. While Picea glauca and Picea engelmannii, for example, differ in shoot and needle characteristics, those with cones present are most easily identified.
Spruces are generally of moderate lifespan, ranging from 100 to 600 years; the oldest reported age for a single tree is 852 years for a specimen of Picea engelmannii. Clonal reproduction can extend this; a Norway spruce P. abies clonal group in Dalarna, Sweden, nicknamed "Old Tjikko" has reproduced by layering, reaching a claimed age of 9,550 years for the clone as a whole, though not for the small trees that are part of it.
Evolution
Fossil history
The Picea lineage begins in the fossil record around 130 million years ago (mya). The oldest record of spruce that has been found in the fossil record is from the Early Cretaceous (Valanginian) of western Canada, around 136 million years old.
The only surviving branch of the lineage, however, diverged only around 30 mya, meaning that the rest of the crown group has no living descendants. That, in turn, means that the biogeography and ecology of the crown group cannot be inferred from living members of the genus. For example, middle Eocene spruce fossils have been found in the Buchanan Lake Formation of Canada (46.2–40.4 mya).
External phylogeny
Based on a transcriptome analysis, Picea is most closely related to the genus Cathaya; those form a clade, sister to the genus Pinus. These genera, with douglas-firs and larches, form the pinoid clade of the Pinaceae.
Another study produced broadly similar results, but with Cathaya sister to [Picea + Pinus]:
Internal phylogeny
DNA analyses have often conflicted with traditional classifications based on the morphology of needle and cone, but also conflict markedly between studies, with more proposed phylogenies than there are studies, and no consensus by 2015 on the relationships within the genus. In particular there is major discordance between phylogenies based on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and those based on chloroplast DNA (cpDNA), and there is strong evidence for a history of reticulate evolution involving extensive hybrid introgression in the genus, which is continuing between several species, such as between Picea abies and Picea obovata (Picea × fennica), and between Picea glauca and Picea engelmannii (Picea × albertiana).
One of the earliest genetic studies used chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) to infer that P. breweriana is sister to all other Picea species, with P. sitchensis sister to those remaining species. However, subsequent studies have shown very different results, with both nuclear DNA and mtDNA placing P. sitchensis in a small clade with what had always been presumed from morphology to be its close relatives, P. glauca and P. engelmannii, with the cpDNA result anomalous; likewise, while P. breweriana has still been recovered as sister to all other species by some studies, it was recovered as deeply embedded in the genus by a study using a large set of nuclear, cp, and mtDNA. A further problem with several studies before 2013 was a combination of misidentified samples and contaminated DNA.
Taxonomy
Taxonomic history
In 1824, Albert Dietrich set up the genus Picea. In 1887, the German botanist Heinrich Moritz Willkomm revised the genus using vegetative characteristics of the trees, rather than of the cones. His classification was followed in 1890 by that of the German botanist Heinrich Mayr, and again in 1982 by that of the Taiwanese biologist Leroy Liu on a similar basis. In 1989 Peter A. Schmidt classified the species in the genus using mainly seed cone characteristics.
Species
As of September 2025, Plants of the World Online accepted 37 species. As no consensus has emerged on relationships from genetic studies, they are listed below in alphabetical order:
Picea abies – Norway spruce, Europe; important in forestry, the original Christmas tree
Picea alcoquiana – (syn. P. bicolor) Alcock's spruce, central Japan (mountains)
Picea asperata – dragon spruce, western China; several varieties
Picea aurantiaca Mast. (doubtfully distinct from P. asperata)
Picea austropanlanica Silba (doubtfully distinct from P. purpurea)
Picea brachytyla – Sargent's spruce, southwest China
Picea breweriana – Brewer's spruce, Klamath Mountains, North America; local endemic
Picea chihuahuana – Chihuahua spruce, northwest Mexico (rare, endangered)
Picea crassifolia – Qinghai spruce, China
Picea engelmannii – Engelmann spruce, western North American mountains; important in forestry
Picea farreri – Burmese spruce, northeast Burma, southwest China (Yunnan)
Picea glauca (syn. P. laxa) – white spruce, northern North America; important in forestry
Picea glehnii – Glehn's spruce, northern Japan, Sakhalin
Picea jezoensis – Jezo spruce, northeast Asia and Kamchatka south to Japan
Picea koraiensis – Korean spruce, Korea, northeast China
Picea koyamae – Koyama's spruce, Japan (mountains)
Picea likiangensis – Likiang spruce, southwest China
Picea linzhiensis (W.C.Cheng & L.K.Fu) Rushforth (syn. P. likiangensis var. linzhiensis) – Linzhi spruce, southeast Tibet (Yarlung Tsangpo valley)
Picea mariana – black spruce, northern North America
Picea martinezii – Martinez spruce, northeast Mexico (very rare, endangered)
Picea maximowiczii – Maximowicz spruce, Japan (rare, mountains)
Picea meyeri – Meyer's spruce, northern China (from Inner Mongolia to Gansu)
Picea morrisonicola – Taiwan spruce, Taiwan (high mountains)
Picea neoveitchii – Veitch's spruce, northwest China (rare, critically endangered)
Picea obovata – Siberian spruce, north Scandinavia, Siberia; sometimes treated as a subspecies of P. abies (and hybridises with it), but has distinct cones
Picea omorika – Serbian spruce, Serbia and Bosnia; local endemic; important in horticulture
Picea orientalis – Caucasian spruce or Oriental spruce, Caucasus, northeast Turkey
Picea polita (syn. P. torano) – tiger-tail spruce, Japan
Picea pungens – blue spruce or Colorado spruce, Rocky Mountains, North America; important in horticulture
Picea purpurea – purple cone spruce, western China
Picea retroflexa – green dragon spruce, China
Picea rubens – red spruce, northeastern North America; important in forestry
Picea schrenkiana – Schrenk's spruce, mountains of central Asia
Picea sitchensis – Sitka spruce, Pacific coast of North America; the largest species, to 95 m tall; important in forestry
Picea smithiana – morinda spruce, western Himalaya, eastern Afghanistan, northern and northwest India
Picea spinulosa – Sikkim spruce, northeast India (Sikkim) and Bhutan, eastern Himalaya
Picea wilsonii – Wilson's spruce, western China
Natural hybrids
These hybrids are known to occur naturally:
Picea × albertiana S.Br. (P. engelmannii × P. glauca)
Picea × fennica (Regel) Kom. (P. abies × P. obovata)
Picea × lutzii Little (P. glauca × P. sitchensis)
Picea × notha Rehder (Picea glehnii × Picea jezoensis)
Cultivated hybrids
The following cultivated origin hybrids have been named; many others have been reported without being named:
Picea × mariorika Boom (P. mariana × P. omorika)
Picea × moseri Mast. (P. jezoensis × P. mariana)
Picea × saaghyi Gayer (P. glauca × P. jezoensis)
The un-named hybrid between Picea omorika and Picea sitchensis shows marked hybrid vigour and has been considered of potential interest in forestry.
Genome
The nuclear, mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of British Columbia interior spruce Picea × albertiana have been sequenced. The large (20 Gbp) nuclear genome and associated gene annotations of interior spruce (genotype PG29) were published in 2013 and 2015.
Ecology
Establishment
Spruce seedlings are most vulnerable from germination to the following spring. More than half of spruce seedling mortality probably occurs during the first growing season and remains high during the first winter. Seedlings four to five years old can be considered "established", since only unusual factors such as snow mould, fire, trampling, or browsing can then impair regeneration success. In dry habitats, seedlings can be considered established when three years old.
Distribution and habitat
Like firs and pines, spruces are important both ecologically and economically in the Northern Hemisphere. While some species are widespread, most have limited geographical ranges. Like firs but unlike pines, spruces are mainly confined to colder areas, with many species in the west of China. The spruces are less tolerant of heat than the firs, and accordingly their distribution reaches further north and less far south.
Diseases
Sirococcus blight is caused by the deuteromycete fungus Sirococcus tsugae. It affects spruces across the Northern Hemisphere, both in forests and in nurseries, causing severe defoliation and shoot blight. It first appeared in Germany and the United Kingdom in 2014. It is spread when rain splashes on the asexual conidia. Control is limited to biosecurity measures.
Rhizosphaera needle cast, a disease that causes leaf fall, is caused by the infection of spruces by the ascomycete fungus Rhizosphaera in North America. It causes severe defoliation. Dead needles show rows of black fruiting bodies. Infection is mainly on lower branches. Control is possible with the fungicide Chlorothalonil, which prevents new infection, if all needles can be sprayed.
Canker disease of spruce is caused by the ascomycete fungal pathogen Leucostoma kunzei (also called Cytospora and Valsa). It is dispersed by spores from pycnidia within the tree's bark, which contain asexual conidia. The conidia are spread by rain splash. The disease affects all spruce species. Trees are more vulnerable under water stress. Fungicides containing copper prevent new infection but these are readily washed off by rain and are not suitable for forestry use.
Predators
Small mammals ingest conifer seeds, and consume seedlings. The short-tailed meadow vole (Microtus pennsylvanicus Ord) voraciously eats white spruce and lodgepole pine seedlings, pulling them out of the ground and consuming them whole. The impact varies; in western Montana, spruce seedling success was little better on protected than on unprotected seed spots, but in British Columbia, spruce regeneration depends on protection from rodents. A mouse can eat 2000 white spruce seeds per night. Seed losses can be large: repeated applications of half a million white spruce seeds per hectare in Alberta failed to produce the required 750 trees per hectare.
Larger mammals too can have an impact; as much as 90% of a cone crop can be harvested by red squirrels, while bark-stripping of white spruce by black bears is locally important in Alaska.
Pests
The European spruce bark beetle (Ips typographus, also called the eight-toothed spruce bark beetle) lays its eggs in the inner bark (phloem) of Picea abies, other spruces, and sometimes other conifers across Europe and Asia. They bring with them ophiostomatoid fungi, some of them serious tree pathogens. The larvae make tunnels in the phloem; in large numbers, they can cut off the phloem and kill the tree.
The eastern spruce budworm (Choristoneura fumiferana) is a major pest of spruce trees in forests throughout Canada and the eastern United States. Two of the main host plants are black spruce and white spruce. Population levels oscillate, sometimes reaching extreme outbreak levels that can cause extreme defoliation of and damage to spruce trees. To reduce destruction, there are multiple methods of control in place, including pesticides.
The great spruce bark beetle (Dendroctonus rufipennis) is a destructive pest of spruce forests in western North America, and has become widespread in Europe and Asia. It arrived in the United Kingdom sometime between 1973 and 1982. It causes dieback of spruce, worst when the trees are stressed by drought. Continued attack can kill the trees. The pest is subject to effective biological control by a natural predator, the Siberian beetle Rhizolophus grandis.
The green spruce aphid (Elatobium abietinum can cause significant defoliation and occasionally tree death in areas with mild winters. It is native to northern and eastern Europe, where it causes little damage as its population is kept in check by the low winter temperatures in the continental climate of the region, with significant aphid mortality occurring when the air temperature drops below -8°C. It becomes much more damaging on spruces in oceanic climates with mild winters such as Great Britain, where it is able to breed more continuously through the winter.
Uses
Timber
Spruce is useful as a building wood, known by names such as North American timber, SPF (spruce-pine-fir) and whitewood. It is commonly used in Canadian Lumber Standard (CLS) graded wood. Spruce wood is used for many purposes, ranging from general construction work and crates to highly specialised uses in wooden aircraft. The Wright brothers' first aircraft, the Flyer, was built of spruce, but the 1947 Hughes H-4 Hercules flying boat, known as the "Spruce Goose", was, in fact, mainly made of birch.
Because this species has poor resistance to insects and fungi after logging, it is recommended for indoor construction, such as indoor drywall framing. Spruce wood left outside cannot be expected to last more than 12–18 months depending on the climate.
Tonewood
Spruce is the standard material used in soundboards for stringed instruments, including guitars. Wood used for this purpose is called tonewood. Species used include Engelmann spruce in North America, and Sitka spruce in Europe. In the Dolomites, the Norway spruces of the Paneveggio "Violins Forest" have for centuries been used for making musical instruments, supposedly including by the leading violin-maker Antonio Stradivari.
Paper
Spruce is a good pulpwood, as it has long fibres which bind together to make strong paper, especially from trees over 60 years old. The pulp, known as northern bleached softwood kraft (NBSK), is used to make products such as tissue paper.
Other materials
The resin was used in the manufacture of pitch in the past (before the use of petrochemicals); the scientific name Picea derives from Latin picea "pitch pine" (the Scots pine).
Native Americans use the thin, pliable roots of some species for weaving baskets and for sewing together pieces of birch bark for canoes. Kiidk'yaas, felled in 1997, was a golden Sitka Spruce sacred to the Haida people. Spruces are popular ornamental trees. Picea abies is extensively used as Christmas trees. Spruce branches are used at Aintree Racecourse in Liverpool to build fences used as horse jumps on the Grand National course.
Food and drink
The fresh shoots of many spruces are a natural source of vitamin C. Captain Cook made alcoholic sugar-based spruce beer during his sea voyages in order to prevent scurvy in his crew.
In Finland, young spruce buds are sometimes used as a spice, or boiled with sugar to create spruce bud syrup.
In art
Around 1900, Edvard Munch made numerous oil paintings of spruce forests, now in the Munch Museum in Oslo.
The Finnish artist and photographer Eija-Liisa Ahtila's work Horizontal–Vaakasuora, exhibited from 2012 at Stockholm's Moderna Museet and the Shirley Sherwood Gallery depicts a 30-metre-tall spruce, arranged horizontally, in six large video panels. XIBT magazine described it as "delving into notions of ecology and symbiosis as well as the essence of existentialism within the context of our external world."

Steel is an alloy of iron and carbon that demonstrates improved mechanical properties compared to the pure form of iron. Due to its high elastic modulus, yield strength, fracture strength and low raw material cost, steel is one of the most commonly manufactured materials in the world. Steel is used in structures (as concrete reinforcing rods or steel beams), in bridges, infrastructure, tools, ships, trains, cars, bicycles, machines, electrical appliances, furniture, and weapons.
Steel is defined as an alloy of iron and carbon and often other elements, with a carbon content not far exceeding 2%. Iron and carbon are always the main elements in steel, but other elements are used to produce various grades of steel, demonstrating altered material, mechanical, and microstructural properties. Stainless steels, for example, typically contain 18% chromium and exhibit improved corrosion and oxidation resistance versus their carbon steel counterpart. Galvanized steel is coated in a layer of zinc to achieve a similar effect. Under atmospheric pressures, steels generally take on two crystalline forms: body-centered cubic and face-centered cubic; however, depending on the thermal history and alloying, the microstructure may contain the distorted martensite phase or the carbon-rich cementite phase, which are tetragonal and orthorhombic, respectively. In the case of alloyed iron, the strengthening is primarily due to the introduction of carbon in the primarily-iron lattice, inhibiting deformation under mechanical stress. Alloying may also induce additional phases that affect the mechanical properties. In most cases, the engineered mechanical properties are at the expense of the ductility and elongation of the pure iron state, which decrease upon the addition of carbon.
Steel was produced in bloomery furnaces for thousands of years, but its large-scale, industrial use began only after more efficient production methods were devised in the 17th century, with the introduction of the blast furnace and production of crucible steel. This was followed by the Bessemer process in England in the mid-19th century, and then by the open-hearth furnace. With the invention of the Bessemer process, a new era of mass-produced steel began. Mild steel replaced wrought iron. The German states were the major steel producers in Europe in the 19th century. American steel production was centred in Pittsburgh, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and Cleveland, Ohio until the late 20th century. Currently, world steel production is centered in China, which produced 54% of the world's steel in 2023.
Further refinements in the process, such as basic oxygen steelmaking (BOS), largely replaced earlier methods by further lowering the cost of production and increasing the quality of the final product. Today, more than 1.6 billion tons of steel are produced annually. Modern steel is generally identified by various grades defined by assorted standards organizations. The modern steel industry is one of the largest manufacturing industries in the world, but also one of the most energy and greenhouse gas emission intense industries, contributing 8% of global emissions. However, steel is also very reusable: it is one of the world's most-recycled materials, with a recycling rate of over 60% globally.
Definitions and related materials
The noun steel originates from the Proto-Germanic adjective *stahliją or *stakhlijan 'made of steel', which is related to *stahlaz or *stahliją 'standing firm'.
The carbon content of steel is between 0.02% and 2.14% by weight for plain carbon steel (iron-carbon alloys). Alloy steel is steel to which other alloying elements have been intentionally added to modify the characteristics of steel. Common alloying elements include: manganese, nickel, chromium, molybdenum, boron, titanium, vanadium, tungsten, cobalt, and niobium. Additional elements, most frequently considered undesirable, are also important in steel: phosphorus, sulphur, silicon, and traces of oxygen, nitrogen, and copper.
Plain iron–carbon alloys with a higher than 2.1% carbon content are known as cast iron. With modern steelmaking techniques such as powder metal forming, it is possible to make very high-carbon (and other alloy material) steels, but such are not common. Cast iron is not malleable even when hot, but it can be formed by casting as it has a lower melting point than steel and good castability properties. Certain compositions of cast iron, while retaining the economies of melting and casting, can be heat treated after casting to make malleable iron or ductile iron objects. Steel is distinguishable from wrought iron (now largely obsolete), which may contain a small amount of carbon A (<0.1 %) but large amounts of slag (around 1–2%).
Production
When iron is smelted from its ore with coke or charcoal, the result has a high amount of carbon and is known as pig iron. To become steel, it must be reprocessed to reduce the carbon to the correct amount, at which point other elements may be added. This process is called refinement, where oxygen is injected into the molten iron to remove excess carbon; oxygen reacts with the carbon to create carbon dioxide gas.
Historically this process would involve continuous trial and error testing of the cooled product to assess whether the correct amount of carbon was present for the material to possess the properties of steel. Today chemical analysis can be performed to determine the exact composition of the alloy, in addition to practical testing of the material's properties such as the Rockwell hardness test, Ultrasonic testing, the Charpy impact test, and the Three-point flexural test. In the past, steel facilities would cast the raw steel product into ingots which would be stored until use in further refinement processes that resulted in the finished product. In modern facilities, the initial product is close to the final composition and is continuously cast into long slabs, cut and shaped into bars and extrusions and heat treated to produce a final product. Today, approximately 96% of steel is continuously cast, while only 4% is produced as ingots. The ingots are then heated in a soaking pit and hot rolled into slabs, billets, or blooms. Slabs are hot or cold rolled into sheet metal or plates. Billets are hot or cold rolled into bars, rods, and wire. Blooms are hot or cold rolled into structural steel, such as I-beams and rails. In modern steel mills these processes often occur in one assembly line, with ore coming in and finished steel products coming out. Sometimes after a steel's final rolling, it is heat treated for strength; however, this is relatively rare.
Material properties
Origins and production
Iron is commonly found in the Earth's crust in the form of an ore, usually an iron oxide, such as magnetite or hematite. Iron is extracted from iron ore under reductive conditions, where oxygen reacts with carbon in the fuel to produce carbon monoxide, which then reduces the iron oxide into metallic iron. This process, known as smelting, was first applied to metals with lower melting points, such as tin, which melts at about 250 °C (482 °F), and copper, which melts at about 1,100 °C (2,010 °F), and the combination, bronze, which has a melting point lower than 1,083 °C (1,981 °F). In comparison, iron melts at about 1,540 °C (2,800 °F), a temperature not attainable at the start of the Iron Age. Small quantities of iron were smelted in ancient times in a semi-liquid state by repeatedly heating the ore in a charcoal fire and then welding the resulting clumps together with a hammer. The process eliminated much of the impurities, resulting in the production of wrought iron. As furnaces reached higher temperatures due to bellows improvements leading to increased airflow, iron with higher carbon contents were able to be produced. Unlike copper and tin, liquid or solid iron dissolves carbon quite readily.
All of these temperatures could be reached with ancient methods used since the Bronze Age. Since the oxidation rate of iron increases rapidly beyond 800 °C (1,470 °F), it is important that smelting takes place in a low-oxygen environment. Smelting, using carbon to reduce iron oxides, results in an alloy (pig iron) that retains too much carbon to be called steel. The excess carbon and other impurities are removed via further processing.
Other materials are often added to the iron/carbon mixture to produce steel with the desired properties. Nickel and manganese in steel add to its tensile strength and make the austenite form of the iron-carbon solution more stable, chromium increases hardness and melting temperature, and vanadium also increases hardness while making it less prone to metal fatigue.
To inhibit corrosion, at least 11% chromium can be added to steel so that a hard oxide forms on the metal surface; this is known as stainless steel. Tungsten slows the formation of cementite, keeping carbon in the iron matrix and allowing martensite to preferentially form at slower quench rates, resulting in high-speed steel. The addition of lead and sulphur decrease grain size, thereby making the steel easier to turn, but also more brittle and prone to corrosion. Such alloys are nevertheless frequently used for components such as nuts, bolts, and washers in applications where toughness and corrosion resistance are not paramount. For the most part, however, p-block elements such as sulphur, nitrogen, phosphorus, and lead are considered contaminants that make steel more brittle and are therefore removed from steel during the melting processing.
Properties
The density of steel varies based on the alloying constituents but usually ranges between 7,750 and 8,050 kg/m3 (484 and 503 lb/cu ft), or 7.75 and 8.05 g/cm3 (4.48 and 4.65 oz/cu in).
Even in a narrow range of concentrations of mixtures of carbon and iron that make steel, several different metallurgical structures, with very different properties can form. Understanding such properties is essential to making quality steel. At room temperature, the most stable form of pure iron is the body-centred cubic (BCC) structure called alpha iron or α-iron. It is a fairly soft metal that can dissolve only a small concentration of carbon, no more than 0.005% at 0 °C (32 °F) and 0.021 wt% at 723 °C (1,333 °F). The inclusion of carbon in alpha iron is called ferrite. At 910 °C, pure iron transforms into a face-centred cubic (FCC) structure, called gamma iron or γ-iron. The inclusion of carbon in gamma iron is called austenite. The more open FCC structure of austenite can dissolve considerably more carbon, as much as 2.1% (38 times that of ferrite), at 1,148 °C (2,098 °F), which reflects the upper carbon content of steel, beyond which is cast iron. When carbon moves out of solution with iron, it forms a very hard, but brittle material called cementite (Fe3C).
When steels with exactly 0.8% carbon (known as a eutectoid steel), are cooled, the austenitic phase (FCC) of the mixture attempts to revert to the ferrite phase (BCC). The carbon no longer fits within the FCC austenite structure, resulting in an excess of carbon. One way for carbon to leave the austenite is for it to precipitate out of solution as cementite, leaving behind a surrounding phase of BCC iron called ferrite with a small percentage of carbon in solution. The two, cementite and ferrite, precipitate simultaneously producing a layered structure called pearlite, named for its resemblance to mother of pearl. In a hypereutectoid composition (greater than 0.8% carbon), the carbon will first precipitate out as large inclusions of cementite at the austenite grain boundaries until the percentage of carbon in the grains has decreased to the eutectoid composition (0.8% carbon), at which point the pearlite structure forms. For steels that have less than 0.8% carbon (hypoeutectoid), ferrite will first form within the grains until the remaining composition rises to 0.8% of carbon, at which point the pearlite structure will form. No large inclusions of cementite will form at the boundaries in hypoeutectoid steel. The above assumes that the cooling process is very slow, allowing enough time for the carbon to migrate.
As the rate of cooling is increased the carbon will have less time to migrate to form carbide at the grain boundaries but will have increasingly large amounts of pearlite of a finer and finer structure within the grains; hence the carbide is more widely dispersed and acts to prevent slip of defects within those grains, resulting in hardening of the steel. At the very high cooling rates produced by quenching, the carbon has no time to migrate but is locked within the face-centred austenite and forms martensite. Martensite is a highly strained and stressed, supersaturated form of carbon and iron and is exceedingly hard but brittle. Depending on the carbon content, the martensitic phase takes different forms. Below 0.2% carbon, it takes on a ferrite BCC crystal form, but at higher carbon content it takes a body-centred tetragonal (BCT) structure. There is no thermal activation energy barrier which prevents transformation from austenite to martensite. There is no compositional change, so the atoms generally retain their same neighbours.
Martensite has a lower density (it expands during the cooling) than does austenite, so that the transformation between them results in a change of volume. In this case, expansion occurs. Internal stresses from this expansion generally take the form of compression on the crystals of martensite and tension on the remaining ferrite, with a fair amount of shear on both constituents. If quenching is done improperly, the internal stresses can cause a part to shatter as it cools. At the very least, they cause internal work hardening and other microscopic imperfections. It is common for quench cracks to form when steel is water quenched, although they may not always be visible.
Heat treatment
There are many types of heat treating processes available to steel, such as annealing, quenching, and tempering.
Annealing is the process of heating the steel to a sufficiently high temperature to relieve local internal stresses. It does not create a general softening of the product but only locally relieves strains and stresses locked up within the material. Annealing goes through three phases: recovery, recrystallization, and grain growth. The temperature required to anneal a particular steel depends on the type of annealing to be achieved and the alloying constituents.
Quenching involves heating the steel to create the austenite phase then quenching it in water or oil. This rapid cooling results in a hard but brittle martensitic structure. The steel is then tempered, which is just a specialized type of annealing, to reduce brittleness. In this application the annealing (tempering) process transforms some of the martensite into cementite, or spheroidite, and hence it reduces the internal stresses and defects. The result is a more ductile and fracture-resistant steel.
History
Ancient
Steel was known in antiquity and was produced in bloomeries and crucibles.
The earliest known production of steel is seen in pieces of ironware excavated from an archaeological site in Anatolia (Kaman-Kalehöyük) which are nearly 4,000 years old, dating from 1800 BC.
Wootz steel was developed in Southern India and Sri Lanka in the 1st millennium BC. Metal production sites in Sri Lanka employed wind furnaces driven by the monsoon winds, capable of producing high-carbon steel. Large-scale wootz steel production in India using crucibles occurred by the sixth century BC, the pioneering precursor to modern steel production and metallurgy.
High-carbon steel was produced in Britain at Broxmouth Hillfort from 490 to 375 BC, and ultrahigh-carbon steel was produced in the Netherlands from the 2nd to 4th centuries AD. The Roman author Horace identifies steel weapons such as the falcata in the Iberian Peninsula, while Noric steel was used by the Roman military.
The Chinese of the Warring States period (403–221 BC) had quench-hardened steel, while Chinese of the Han dynasty (202 BC – AD 220) created steel by melting together wrought iron with cast iron, thus producing a carbon-intermediate steel by the 1st century AD.
There is evidence that carbon steel was made in Western Tanzania by the ancestors of the Haya people as early as 2,000 years ago by a complex process of "pre-heating" allowing temperatures inside a furnace to reach 1300 to 1400 °C.
Wootz and Damascus
Evidence of the earliest production of high carbon steel in South Asia is found in Kodumanal in Tamil Nadu, the Golconda area in Telangana and Karnataka, regions of India, as well as in Samanalawewa and Dehigaha Alakanda, regions of Sri Lanka. This came to be known as wootz steel, produced in South India by about the sixth century BC and exported globally. The steel technology existed prior to 326 BC in the region as they are mentioned in literature of Sangam Tamil, Arabic, and Latin as the finest steel in the world exported to the Roman, Egyptian, Chinese and Arab worlds at that time – what they called Seric iron. A 200 BC Tamil trade guild in Tissamaharama, in the South East of Sri Lanka, brought with them some of the oldest iron and steel artifacts and production processes to the island from the classical period. The Chinese and locals in Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka had also adopted the production methods of creating wootz steel from the Chera Dynasty Tamils of South India by the 5th century AD. In Sri Lanka, this early steel-making method employed a unique wind furnace, driven by the monsoon winds, capable of producing high-carbon steel. Since the technology was acquired from the Tamilians from South India, the origin of steel technology in India can be conservatively estimated at 400–500 BC.
The manufacture of wootz steel and Damascus steel, famous for its durability and ability to hold an edge, may have been taken by the Arabs from Persia, who took it from India. In 327 BC, Alexander the Great was rewarded by the defeated King Porus, not with gold or silver but with 30 pounds of steel. The Greek alchemist Zosimos of Panopolis attested to the Indian origin of wootz steel, stating that "Indians made high quality swords by melting soft iron in crucibles." A recent study has speculated that carbon nanotubes were included in its structure, which might explain some of its legendary qualities, though, given the technology of that time, such qualities were produced by chance rather than by design. Natural wind was used where the soil containing iron was heated by the use of wood. The ancient Sinhalese managed to extract a ton of steel for every 2 tons of soil, a remarkable feat at the time. One such furnace was found in Samanalawewa and archaeologists were able to produce steel as the ancients did.
Crucible steel, formed by slowly heating and cooling pure iron and carbon (typically in the form of charcoal) in a crucible, was produced in Merv by the 9th to 10th century AD. In the 11th century, there is evidence of the production of steel in Song China using two techniques: a "berganesque" method that produced inferior, inhomogeneous steel, and a precursor to the modern Bessemer process that used partial decarburization via repeated forging under a cold blast.
Modern
Since the 17th century, the first step in European steel production has been the smelting of iron ore into pig iron in a blast furnace. Originally employing charcoal, modern methods use coke, which has proven more economical.
Processes starting from bar iron
In these processes, pig iron made from raw iron ore was refined (fined) in a finery forge to produce bar iron, which was then used in steel-making.
The production of steel by the cementation process was described in a treatise published in Prague in 1574 and was in use in Nuremberg from 1601. A similar process for case hardening armour and files was described in a book published in Naples in 1589. The process was introduced to England in about 1614 and used to produce such steel by Sir Basil Brooke at Coalbrookdale during the 1610s.
The raw material for this process were bars of iron. During the 17th century, it was realized that the best steel came from oregrounds iron of a region north of Stockholm, Sweden. This was still the usual raw material source in the 19th century, almost as long as the process was used.
Crucible steel is steel that has been melted in a crucible rather than having been forged, with the result that it is more homogeneous. Most previous furnaces could not reach high enough temperatures to melt the steel. The early modern crucible steel industry resulted from the invention of Benjamin Huntsman in the 1740s. Blister steel (made as above) was melted in a crucible or in a furnace, and cast (usually) into ingots.
Processes starting from pig iron
The modern era in steelmaking began with the introduction of Henry Bessemer's process in 1855, the raw material for which was pig iron. His method let him produce steel in large quantities cheaply, thus mild steel came to be used for most purposes for which wrought iron was formerly used. The Gilchrist-Thomas process (or basic Bessemer process) was an improvement to the Bessemer process, made by lining the converter with a basic material to remove phosphorus.
Another 19th-century steelmaking process was the Siemens-Martin process, which complemented the Bessemer process, which originally consisted of co-melting wrought-iron scrap with pig iron.
These methods of steel production were rendered obsolete by the Linz-Donawitz process of basic oxygen steelmaking (BOS), developed in 1952, and other oxygen steel making methods. Basic oxygen steelmaking is superior to previous steelmaking methods because the oxygen pumped into the furnace limited impurities, primarily nitrogen, that previously had entered from the air used, and because, with respect to the open hearth process, the same quantity of steel from a BOS process is manufactured in one-twelfth the time. Today, electric arc furnaces (EAF) are a common method of reprocessing scrap metal to create new steel. They can also be used for converting pig iron to steel, but they use a lot of electrical energy (about 440 kWh per metric ton), and are thus generally only economical when there is a plentiful supply of cheap electricity.
Industry
The steel industry is often considered an indicator of economic progress, because of the critical role played by steel in infrastructural and overall economic development. In 1980, there were more than 500,000 U.S. steelworkers. By 2000, the number of steelworkers had fallen to 224,000.
The economic boom in China and India caused a massive increase in the demand for steel. Between 2000 and 2005, world steel demand increased by 6%. Since 2000, several Indian and Chinese steel firms have expanded to meet demand, such as Tata Steel (which bought Corus Group in 2007), Baosteel Group and Shagang Group. As of 2017, though, ArcelorMittal is the world's largest steel producer.
In 2005, the British Geological Survey stated China was the top steel producer with about one-third of the world share; Japan, Russia, and the United States were second, third, and fourth, respectively, according to the survey. At the end of 2008, the steel industry faced a sharp downturn that led to many cut-backs. Steelmaking is a significant contributor to climate change, accounting for around 7% of global greenhouse gas emissions as of 2024. Potential ways to reduce emissions include replacing coke-based production methods with hydrogen, increasing recycling of steel, and applying carbon capture and storage technology.
Recycling
Steel is one of the world's most-recycled materials, with a recycling rate of over 60% globally; in the United States alone, over 82,000,000 metric tons (81,000,000 long tons; 90,000,000 short tons) were recycled in the year 2008, for an overall recycling rate of 83%.
As more steel is produced than is scrapped, the amount of recycled raw materials is about 40% of the total of steel produced – in 2016, 1,628,000,000 tonnes (1.602×109 long tons; 1.795×109 short tons) of crude steel was produced globally, with 630,000,000 tonnes (620,000,000 long tons; 690,000,000 short tons) recycled.
Contemporary
Carbon
Modern steels are made with varying combinations of alloy metals to fulfil many purposes. Carbon steel, composed simply of iron and carbon, accounts for 90% of steel production. Low alloy steel is alloyed with other elements, usually molybdenum, manganese, chromium, or nickel, in amounts of up to 10% by weight to improve the hardenability of thick sections. High strength low alloy steel has small additions (usually less than 2% by weight) of other elements, typically 1.5% manganese, to provide additional strength for a modest price increase.
Recent corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) regulations have given rise to a new variety of steel known as Advanced High Strength Steel (AHSS). This material is both strong and ductile so that vehicle structures can maintain their current safety levels while using less material. There are several commercially available grades of AHSS, such as dual-phase steel, which is heat treated to contain both a ferritic and martensitic microstructure to produce a formable, high strength steel. Transformation Induced Plasticity (TRIP) steel involves special alloying and heat treatments to stabilize amounts of austenite at room temperature in normally austenite-free low-alloy ferritic steels. By applying strain, the austenite undergoes a phase transition to martensite without the addition of heat. Twinning Induced Plasticity (TWIP) steel uses a specific type of strain to increase the effectiveness of work hardening on the alloy.
Carbon steels are often galvanized, through hot-dip or electroplating in zinc for protection against rust.
Alloy
Stainless steel contains a minimum of 11% chromium, often combined with nickel, to resist corrosion. Some stainless steels, such as the ferritic stainless steels are magnetic, while others, such as the austenitic, are nonmagnetic. Corrosion-resistant steels are abbreviated as CRES.
Alloy steels are plain-carbon steels in which small amounts of alloying elements like chromium and vanadium have been added. Some more modern steels include tool steels, which are alloyed with large amounts of tungsten and cobalt or other elements to maximize solution hardening. This also allows the use of precipitation hardening and improves the alloy's temperature resistance. Tool steel is generally used in axes, drills, and other devices that need a sharp, long-lasting cutting edge. Other special-purpose alloys include weathering steels such as Cor-ten, which weather by acquiring a stable, rusted surface, and so can be used un-painted. Maraging steel is alloyed with nickel and other elements, but unlike most steel contains little carbon (0.01%). This creates a very strong but still malleable steel.
Eglin steel uses a combination of over a dozen different elements in varying amounts to create a relatively low-cost steel for use in bunker buster weapons. Hadfield steel, named after Robert Hadfield, or manganese steel, contains 12–14% manganese which, when abraded, strain-hardens to form a very hard skin which resists wearing. Uses of this particular alloy include tank tracks, bulldozer blade edges, and cutting blades on the jaws of life.
Standards
Most of the more commonly used steel alloys are categorized into various grades by standards organizations. For example, the Society of Automotive Engineers has a series of grades defining many types of steel. The American Society for Testing and Materials has a separate set of standards, which define alloys such as A36 steel, the most commonly used structural steel in the United States. The JIS also defines a series of steel grades that are used extensively in Japan and surrounding countries.
Uses
Iron and steel are used widely in the construction of roads, railways, other infrastructure, appliances, and buildings. Most large modern structures, such as stadiums and skyscrapers, bridges, and airports, are supported by a steel skeleton. Even those with a concrete structure employ steel for reinforcing. It sees widespread use in major appliances and cars. Despite the growth in usage of aluminium, steel is still the main material for car bodies. Steel is used in a variety of other construction materials, such as bolts, nails and screws, and other household products and cooking utensils.
Other common applications include shipbuilding, pipelines, mining, offshore construction, aerospace, white goods (e.g. washing machines), heavy equipment such as bulldozers, office furniture, steel wool, tool, and armour in the form of personal vests and helmets or vehicle armour (better known as rolled homogeneous armour in this role).
Historical
Before the introduction of the Bessemer process and other modern production techniques, steel was expensive and was only used where no cheaper alternative existed, particularly for the cutting edge of knives, razors, swords, and other items where a hard, sharp edge was needed. It was also used for springs, including those used in clocks and watches.
With the advent of faster and cheaper production methods, steel has become easier to obtain and much cheaper. It has replaced wrought iron for a multitude of purposes. However, the availability of plastics in the latter part of the 20th century allowed these materials to replace steel in some applications due to their lower fabrication cost and weight. Carbon fibre is replacing steel in reinforcement-based applications owing to its high modulus value (up to 5 times higher than steel), but its high cost is a barrier to widespread use in transportation.
Long
As reinforcing bars and mesh in reinforced concrete
Railroad tracks
Structural steel in modern buildings and bridges
Wires
Input to reforging applications
Flat carbon
Major appliances
Magnetic cores
The inside and outside body of automobiles, trains, and ships.
Weathering (COR-TEN)
Intermodal containers
Outdoor sculptures
Architecture
Stainless
Low-background
Steel manufactured after World War II is contaminated with radionuclides, because steel production uses air, and the atmosphere is contaminated with radioactive dust produced by nuclear weapons testing. Low-background steel, steel manufactured prior to 1945, is used for certain radiation-sensitive applications such as Geiger counters and radiation shielding.

Stone tools have been used throughout human history but are most closely associated with prehistoric cultures and in particular those of the Stone Age. Stone tools may be made of either ground stone or knapped stone, the latter fashioned by a craftsman called a flintknapper. Stone has been used to make a wide variety of tools throughout history, including arrowheads, spearheads, hand axes, and querns. Knapped stone tools are nearly ubiquitous in pre-metal-using societies because they are easy to manufacture, the tool stone raw material is usually plentiful, and they are easy to transport and sharpen.
The study of stone tools is a cornerstone of prehistoric archaeology because stone tools are very resistant to natural degradation and therefore ubiquitous components of the archaeological record. Ethnoarchaeology is used to deepen understanding of, and to explore the cultural implications of, stone tool use and manufacture.
Knapped stone tools are made from cryptocrystalline materials such as chert, flint, radiolarite, chalcedony, obsidian, basalt, and quartzite via a splitting process known as lithic reduction. One simple form of reduction is to strike stone flakes from a lithic core of material using a hammerstone or similar hard hammer fabricator. If the goal is to produce flakes, the remnant core may be discarded once it is too small to continue producing flakes. In some strategies, however, a flintknapper makes a tool from the core by reducing it to a rough unifacial or bifacial preform, which is further reduced by using soft hammer flaking or by pressure flaking the edges. More complex forms of reduction may produce highly standardized blades, which can then be fashioned into a variety of tools such as scrapers, knives, sickles, and microliths.
Evolution
Archaeologists classify stone tools into industries (also known as complexes or technocomplexes) that share distinctive technological or morphological characteristics.
In 1969 in the 2nd edition of World Prehistory, Grahame Clark proposed an evolutionary progression of flint-knapping in which the "dominant lithic technologies" occurred in a fixed sequence from Mode 1 through Mode 5. He assigned to them relative dates: Modes 1 and 2 to the Lower Palaeolithic, 3 to the Middle Palaeolithic, 4 to the Upper Paleolithic, and 5 to the Mesolithic, though there were other lithic technologies outside these Modes. Each region had its own timeline for the succession of the Modes: for example, Mode 1 was in use in Europe long after it had been replaced by Mode 2 in Africa.
Clark's scheme was adopted enthusiastically by the archaeological community. One of its advantages was the simplicity of its terminology; for example, the Mode 1/Mode 2 Transition. The transitions are currently of greatest interest. Consequently, in the literature, the stone tools used during the Palaeolithic are divided into four "modes", each of which denotes a different level of complexity and, in most cases, follows a rough chronological order.
Pre-Mode I
Kenya
Stone tools found from 2011 to 2014 at the Lomekwi archeological site near Lake Turkana in Kenya are dated to 3.3 million years old and predate the genus Homo by about 1 million years. The oldest known Homo fossil is about 2.4–2.3 million years old compared to the 3.3 million year old stone tools. The stone tools may have been made by Australopithecus afarensis, the species whose best fossil example is Lucy, which inhabited East Africa at the same time as the date of the oldest stone tools, a yet unidentified species, or by Kenyanthropus platyops (a 3.2 to 3.5-million-year-old Pliocene hominin fossil discovered in 1999). Dating of the tools was done by dating volcanic ash layers in which the tools were found and dating the magnetic signature (pointing north or south due to reversal of the magnetic poles) of the rock at the site.
Ethiopia
Grooved, cut, and fractured animal bone fossils, made by using stone tools, were found in Dikika, Ethiopia, near (200 yards) the remains of Selam, a young Australopithecus afarensis girl who lived about 3.3 million years ago.
Mode I: The Oldowan Industry
The earliest stone tools in the era of the genus Homo are Mode 1 tools, and come from what has been termed the Oldowan Industry, named after the type of site (many sites, actually) found in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, where they were discovered in large quantities. Oldowan tools were characterised by their simple construction, predominantly using core forms. These cores were river pebbles, or similar rocks, that had been struck by a spherical hammerstone, causing conchoidal fractures, removing flakes from one surface, creating an edge, and often a sharp tip. The blunt end is the proximal surface; the sharp end is the distal. Oldowan is a percussion technology. Grasping the proximal surface, the hominid brought the distal surface down hard on an object he wished to detach or shatter, such as a bone or tuber. Experiments with modern humans found that knapping-naive participants can invent all four Oldowan knapping techniques, and that the experiment participants used the resulting Oldowan tools to access a money-baited box.
The earliest known Oldowan tools have been found at Nyayanga on the Homa Peninsula in Kenya and are dated to ~2.9 million years ago (Ma), as well as from the Gona and Ledi-Geraru sites in Ethiopia, dated from around 2.6 million years ago, during the Lower Palaeolithic. After this date, the Oldowan Industry subsequently spread throughout much of Africa, although archaeologists are currently unsure which Hominan species first developed them, with some speculating that it was Australopithecus garhi, and others believing that it was in fact Homo habilis. Homo habilis was the hominin who used the tools for most of the Oldowan in Africa, but at about 1.9–1.8 million years ago Homo erectus inherited them. The industry flourished in southern and eastern Africa between 2.6 and 1.7 million years ago, but was also spread out of Africa and into Eurasia by travelling bands of H. erectus, who took it as far east as Java by 1.8 million years ago and Northern China by 1.6 million years ago.
Mode II: The Acheulean Industry
Eventually, more complex Mode 2 tools were developed during the Acheulean Industry, named after the site of Saint-Acheul in France. The Acheulean was characterised not by the core, but by the biface, the most notable form of which was the hand axe. The Acheulean first appears in the archaeological record as early as 1.7 million years ago in the West Turkana area of Kenya and contemporaneously in southern Africa.
The Leakeys, excavators at Olduvai, defined a "Developed Oldowan" Period, during which they believed they found evidence of an overlap between Oldowan and Acheulean. In their species-specific view of the two industries, Oldowan equated to H. habilis and Acheulean to H. erectus. Developed Oldowan was assigned to habilis and Acheulean to erectus. Subsequent dates for H. erectus pushed the fossils back to well before the Acheulean; that is, H. erectus must have initially used Mode 1. There was no reason to think, therefore, that Developed Oldowan had to be habilis; it could have been erectus. Opponents of the view divide the Developed Oldowan between Oldowan and Acheulean. There is no question, however, that habilis and erectus coexisted, as habilis fossils have been found as late as 1.4 million years ago. Meanwhile, African H. erectus developed Mode 2. In any case, a wave of Mode 2 then spread across Eurasia, leading to its adoption there. H. erectus may not have been the only hominin to leave Africa; European fossils are sometimes associated with Homo ergaster, a contemporary of H. erectus in Africa.
In contrast to an Oldowan tool, which is the result of a fortuitous and probably unplanned operation to obtain one sharp edge on a stone, an Acheulean tool is a planned result of a manufacturing process. The manufacturer begins with a blank, either a larger stone or a slab knocked off a larger rock. From this blank, they remove large flakes to be used as cores. Standing on a core on an anvil stone, they strike the exposed edge with centripetal blows of a hard hammer to roughly shape the implement. Then the piece must be worked over again, or retouched, with a soft hammer of wood or bone to produce a tool finely knapped all over, consisting of two convex surfaces intersecting in a sharp edge. Such a tool is used for slicing; a concussion would destroy the edge and cut the hand.
Some Mode 2 tools are disk-shaped; others are ovoid; others are leaf-shaped and pointed; and others are elongated and pointed at the distal end, with a blunt proximal end, obviously used for drilling. Mode 2 tools are used for butchering; not being composite (having no haft) they are not very effective killing instruments. The killing must have been done some other way. Mode 2 tools are larger than Oldowan. The blank was ported to serve as an ongoing source of flakes until it was finally retouched into a finished tool. Edges were often sharpened by further retouching.
Mode III: The Mousterian Industry
Eventually, the Acheulean in Europe was replaced by a lithic technology known as the Mousterian Industry, which was named after the site of Le Moustier in France, where examples were first uncovered in the 1860s. Evolving from the Acheulean, it adopted the Levallois technique to produce smaller and sharper knife-like tools as well as scrapers. Also known as the "prepared core technique", flakes are struck from worked cores and then subsequently retouched. The Mousterian Industry was developed and used primarily by the Neanderthals, a native European and Middle Eastern hominin species, but a broadly similar industry is contemporaneously widespread in Africa.
Mode IV: The Aurignacian Industry
The widespread use of long blades (rather than flakes) of the Upper Palaeolithic Mode 4 industries appeared during the Upper Palaeolithic between 50,000 and 10,000 years ago, although blades were produced in small quantities much earlier by Neanderthals. The Aurignacian culture seems to have been the first to rely largely on blades. The use of blades exponentially increases the efficiency of core usage compared to the Levallois flake technique, which had a similar advantage over Acheulean technology, which was worked from cores.
Expansion to the New World
As humans spread to the Americas in the Late Pleistocene, Paleo-Indians brought with them stone tools related to those that evolved separately from Old World technologies. The Clovis point is the most widespread example of Late Pleistocene points in the Americas, dating to about 13,000 years ago.
One of the earliest cases of tool use comes from the Channel Islands (California), which were among the earliest places in North America to develop civilization. The tools found were drills, reamers, scrapers, abraders, spoke-shave, macroblade plane, burin, and wood-splitting wedges. These tools show that the people living there were skilled in woodworking.
Other tools found on the Channel Islands were crescent-shaped and heat-flaked.
In the San Francisco Bay Area acorns found were often associated with grinding tools. Acorns show diachronic changes in tribal life as the tools for processing them evolved. Mortar tools, such as millingstones and mortar and pestle, used to grind acorns, are dated to different periods at different locations.
Central America, or Mesoamerica, also has several unique stone-tool industries with their own specific cultural associations. One such industry is the Lowe industry, found in southern Mesoamerica near modern-day Belize. These tools are versatile biface points defined by their basal thinning and barbed cutting edges. Ancient Mesoamericans, not unlike other stone-tool users, used a combination of multitools and tools made for specific purposes, such as cutting, scraping, whittling, and the making of other stone tools.
One famous use of stone tools in Mesoamerica is the formidable Macuahuitl, the Aztec "sword" consisting of a flat board whose outside face is lined with microliths. These weapons appear in the archaeological record as well as in many primary source depictions, such as the Florentine Codex. Aztec warriors wielded these powerful weapons in war; however, they also held symbolic and political significance.
Stones and stone tools in Mesoamerica held great power beyond their practical uses. In ancestral Maya traditions, axes and scepters were powerful tools of magic, and were wielded by gods and monarchs alike. Materials such as obsidian and flint are directly associated with certain gods like Ītzpāpālōtl and play critical roles in powerful divining magic. Mirrors were tools of divination in Maya tradition, and were often made out of obsidian. Stone tools were also the medium through which human sacrifice and bloodletting were performed.
Mode V: The Microlithic Industries
Mode 5 stone tools involve the production of microliths, which were used in composite tools, mainly fastened to a shaft. Examples include the Magdalenian culture. Such a technology makes much more efficient use of available materials like flint, although it requires greater skill in manufacturing the small flakes. Mounting sharp flint edges in a wooden or bone handle is the key innovation in microliths, essentially because the handle protects the user from the flint and improves the device's leverage.
Neolithic industries
In prehistoric Japan, ground stone tools appear during the Japanese Paleolithic period, that lasted from around 40,000 BC to 14,000 BC. Elsewhere, ground stone tools became important during the Neolithic period beginning about 10,000 BC. These ground or polished implements are manufactured from larger-grained materials such as basalt, jade and jadeite, greenstone, and some forms of rhyolite, which are not suitable for flaking. The greenstone industry was important in the English Lake District, and is known as the Langdale axe industry. Ground stone implements included adzes, celts, and axes, which were manufactured by a labour-intensive, time-consuming method of repeated grinding against an abrasive stone, often with water as a lubricant. Because of their coarse surfaces, some ground stone tools were used for grinding plant foods and were polished not just by intentional shaping, but also by use. Manos are hand stones used in conjunction with metates for grinding corn or grain. Polishing increased the intrinsic mechanical strength of the axe. Polished stone axes were important for the widespread clearance of woods and forests during the Neolithic period, when crop and livestock farming developed on a large scale. They are widely distributed and were traded over long distances, since the best rock types were often very local. They also became venerated objects, and were frequently buried in long barrows or round barrows with their former owners.
During the Neolithic period, large axes were made from flint nodules by knapping a rough shape, a so-called "rough-out". Such products were traded across a wide area. The rough-outs were then polished to achieve a fine finish, forming the axe head. Polishing increased the product's strength and durability. There were many sources of supply, including Grimes Graves in Suffolk, Cissbury in Sussex and Spiennes near Mons in Belgium to mention but a few. In Britain, there were numerous small quarries in downland areas where flint was removed for local use, for example.
Many other rocks were used to make axes from stones, including the Langdale axe industry as well as numerous other sites such as Penmaenmawr and Tievebulliagh in Co Antrim, Ulster. In Langdale, there are many outcrops of the greenstone that were exploited and knapped where the stone was extracted. The sites exhibit piles of waste flakes and rejected rough-outs. Polishing improved the mechanical strength of the tools, so increasing their life and effectiveness. Many other tools were developed using the same techniques. Such products were traded across the country and abroad.
Aboriginal Australian use
Stone axes from 35,000 years ago are the earliest known use of a stone tool in Australia. Other stone tools varied in type and use among Aboriginal Australian peoples, depending on geographical region, and their form and structure varied among different cultural and linguistic groups. The locations of the various artefacts, as well as whole geological features, demarcated the territorial and cultural boundaries of the lands of various linguistic and cultural groups. They developed trade networks and demonstrated sophistication in working many different types of stone for various uses, including tools, food utensils, and weapons, and modified their stone tools over the millennia to adapt to changing environments. Oral traditions passed down the skills through the ages.
Complex stone tools were used by the Gunditjmara of western Victoria until relatively recently. Many examples are now held in museums.
Flaked stone tools were made by extracting a sharp fragment of stone from a larger piece, called a core, by hitting it with a "hammerstone". Both the flakes and the hammerstones could be used as tools. The best types of stone for these tools are hard, brittle stones, rich in silica, such as quartzite, chert, flint, silcrete and quartz (the latter particularly in the Kimberleys of Western Australia). These were quarried from bedrock or collected as pebbles from watercourses and beaches, and often carried for long distances. The flake could be used immediately for cutting or scraping, but were sometimes modified in a process called reduction to sharpen or resharpen the flake.
Across northern Australia, especially in Arnhem Land, the "Leilira blade", a rectangular stone flake struck from quartzite or silcrete, was used as a spear tip and as a knife, sometimes 30 cm (12 in) long. Tasmania did not have spears or stone axes, but the people there used tools adapted to the climate and environment, such as spongolite. In north-western Australia, "Kimberley point", a small triangular stone point, was created using kangaroo bone which had been shaped with stone into an awl, to make small serrations in the blade.
Apart from being used as weapons and for cutting, grinding (grindstones), piercing, and pounding, some stones, notably ochres, were used as pigment for painting.
Modern uses
Stone tools are still one of the most successful technologies used by humans.
The invention of the flintlock gun mechanism in the sixteenth century produced a demand for specially shaped gunflints. The gunflint industry survived until the middle of the twentieth century in some places, including in the English town of Brandon.
Threshing boards with lithic flakes have been used in agriculture since the Neolithic and are still used today in regions where agriculture has not been mechanized and industrialized.
The Ohlone people of the San Francisco Bay area observe modernization in their social environments, and the stone tools (mortar and pestle) they used in the past are now collected by their descendants as a remembrance of their history.
Glassy stones (flint, quartz, jasper, agate) were used with a variety of iron pyrite or marcasite stones as percussion fire starter tools. That was the most common method of producing fire in pre-industrial societies. Stones were later superseded by the use of steel, ferrocerium, and matches.
For specialist purposes, glass knives are still made and used today, particularly for cutting thin sections for electron microscopy in a technique known as microtomy. Freshly cut blades are always used because their edges are very sharp. These knives are made from high-quality manufactured glass, however, not from natural raw materials such as chert or obsidian. Surgical knives made from obsidian are still used in some delicate surgeries, as they are sharper and cause less damage to tissues than metal surgical knives, and the resulting wounds heal more quickly. In 1975, American archaeologist Don Crabtree manufactured obsidian scalpels to perform surgery on his own body.

The Straits Trading Company Limited is a Singapore-based corporation with operations in Singapore and Malaysia, as well as various localities in Asia and Australia.
Founded in 1887, the company was the result of a partnership for tin smelting between James Sword, a Scottish businessman, and Herman Muhlinghaus, a German entrepreneur; the Straits Trading Company was later incorporated in Singapore on 8 November 1887 with a hefty capital of S$150,000 during its days. The company eventually rose to become one of the largest tin smelters in the world, operating at tin rich deposits in the Kinta Valley and Klang Valley of then British Malaya (Peninsular Malaysia).
By the late-20th century, the company began diversifying into hotel and property management, and financial investment; it also became a member of the Tecity Group. Mining and smelting operations that the Straits Trading Company was originally engaged in were eventually carried out by its 73%-owned subsidiary, the Malaysia Smelting Corporation Berhad (MYX: 5916), a public listed company on Bursa Malaysia.
In January 2026, Straits Trading Company, through its subsidiary Straits Real Estate, entered into an agreement to divest a logistics asset in Incheon, South Korea, to a local institutional investor for approximately S$396 million.

Acoustic or stress wave tomography is a non-destructive measurement method for the visualization of the structural integrity of a solid object. It is being used to test the preservation of wood or concrete, for example. The term acoustic tomography refers to the perceptible sounds that are caused by the mechanical impulses used for measuring. The term stress wave tomography describes the measurement method more accurately.
Features
The method is based on multiple measurements of the time of flight of stress waves between sensors which are connected to a two- or three-dimensional sampling grid. In the acoustic stress wave tomography of trees (see also: tree diagnosis), concussion sensors are attached in one or several planes around a trunk or a branch and their positions are measured. Impulses are induced through strokes of a hammer and the arrival times at the sensors are recorded.
The propagation speed of impulses in solid objects correlates with the density and the elastic modulus of the material (see also: speed of sound). Internal damage, like rot or cracks, slows down the impulses or forms barriers that render transition of impulses more difficult. This leads to longer propagation times and gets interpreted as reduced speed. Apparent velocity of sound is calculated by dividing the smallest distance between sensors by the time of flight between them.
Special mathematical algorithms turn the matrix of velocities into a color or greyscale image (tomogram) which enables an assessment of the extent of damage. The precision of the method is limited by the number of sensors used. Image resolution is inferior to X-ray computed tomography due to the longer wavelength of the signals, but avoids issues with high energy radiation.
Devices of this kind are the Arbotom, the PiCUS acoustic tomograph and the Arborsonic 3D.
Literature
Tomikawa, Y., Iwase, Y., Arita, K., and Yamada, H., 1986. Nondestructive Inspection of a Wooden Pole Using Ultrasonic Computed Tomography. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, 33 (4), 354–358.
Turpening, R.M., Zhu, Z., Matarese, J.R., and Lewis, C.E., 1999. Acoustic tree and wooden member imaging apparatus. Patent WO 99/44050 (1999.02.27)
Rinn, F. (1999): Vorrichtung zur Materialuntersuchung. / Device for investigation materials. International Patent PCT/DE00/01467 (1999.05.11).
Rust S.; Göcke, L. (2000): A new tomographic device for the non-destructive testing of standing trees. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Nondestructive Testing of Wood. University of Western Hungary, Sopron, 13–15 September 2000, 233–238.
Rust, S. (2001): Baumdiagnose ohne Bohren. AFZ – Der Wald 56: 924–925.
Rinn, F. (2003): Technische Grundlagen der Impuls-Tomographie, Baumzeitung (8): 29–31.
Rabe, C., Ferner, D., Fink, S., Schwarze, F. (2004): Detection of decay in trees with stress waves and interpretation of acoustic tomograms. Arborcultural Journal 28 (1/2): 3–19
Haaben, C., Sander, C., Hapla, F., 2006: Untersuchung der Stammqualität verschiedener Laubholzarten mittels Schallimpuls-Tomographie. Holztechnologie 47 (6): 2–5

Sugar charcoal is formed by the charring of cane sugar, which was repeatedly recrystallized to remove any organic impurities. It is also prepared by the dehydration of sugar in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid. The sulfuric acid is such a strong dehydrating agent that it abstracts water from the sugar molecules themselves and leaves behind black residue of carbon (i.e. the general formula for sugars is Cx(H2O)x and it is this water that is removed with only carbon remaining). It is the purest form of amorphous carbon.
Use
Since sugar charcoal is a method of producing very pure carbon it is used to prepare artificial diamonds. When heated strongly at high temperature (3000-3500 °C) and high pressure, it is converted into an artificial diamond.
It is used as a reducing agent in the process of extraction of metals.
Sugar charcoal has decolourizing properties, which means it removes some dyes, such as methylene blue, from water. Note: this is not a chemical bleaching process, but rather a physical process. The dyes are adsorbed into the pores and onto the surface of the charcoal particles, thereby removing them from solution.

Survival skills are techniques used to sustain life in any type of natural environment or built environment. These techniques are meant to provide basic necessities for human life, including water, food, and shelter. Survival skills also support proper knowledge and interactions with animals and plants to promote the sustaining of life over time.
Survival skills are basic ideas and abilities that ancient people invented and passed down for thousands of years. Today, survival skills are often associated with surviving in a disaster situation.
Outdoor activities such as hiking, backpacking, horseback riding, fishing, and hunting all require basic wilderness survival skills, especially to handle emergencies. Individuals who practice survival skills as a type of outdoor recreation or hobby may describe themselves as survivalists. Survival skills are often used by people living off-grid lifestyles such as homesteaders. Bushcraft and primitive living are most often self-implemented but require many of the same skills.
First aid
First aid (wilderness first aid in particular) can help a person survive and function with injuries and illnesses that would otherwise kill or compromise them. Common and dangerous injuries include:
Bites from snakes, spiders, and other wild animals
Bone fractures
Burns
Drowsiness
Headache
Heart attack
Hemorrhage
Hypothermia and hyperthermia
Infection from food, animal contact, or drinking non-potable water
Poisoning from poisonous plants or fungi
Sprains, particularly of the ankle
Vomiting
Wounds, which may become infected
The person may need to apply the contents of a first aid kit or, if possessing the required knowledge, naturally occurring medicinal plants, immobilize injured limbs, or even transport incapacitated comrades.
Shelter
Many people who are forced into survival situations often have an elevated risk of danger because of direct exposure to the elements. Many people in survival situations die of hypothermia or hyperthermia, or animal attacks. An effective shelter can range from a natural shelter, such as a cave, overhanging rock outcrop, or a fallen-down tree, to an intermediate form of man-made shelter such as a debris hut, tree pit shelter, or snow cave, to a completely man-made structure such as a tarp, tent, or a longhouse. It is noted that some common properties between these structures are:
Location (away from hazards, such as cliffs; and nearby materials, like food sources)
Insulation (from the ground, rain, wind, air, or sun)
Heat Source (either body heat or fire-heated)
Personal or Group Shelter (having multiple individuals)
Fire
Fire is a tool that helps meet many survival needs. A campfire can be used to boil water, rendering it safe to drink, and to cook food. Fire also creates a sense of safety and protection, which can provide an overlooked psychological boost. When temperatures are low, fire can postpone or prevent the risk of hypothermia. In a wilderness survival situation, fire can provide a sense of home in addition to being an essential energy source. Fire may deter wild animals from interfering with an individual, though some wild animals may also be attracted to the light and heat of a fire.
There are numerous methods for starting a fire in a survival situation. Fires are either started with the case of the solar spark lighter, or through a spark, as in the case of a flint striker. Fires will often be extinguished if either there is excessive wind, or if the fuel or environment is too wet. Lighting a fire without a lighter or matches, e.g. by using natural flint and metal with tinder, is a frequent subject of both books on survival and in survival courses, because it allows an individual to start a fire with few materials in the event of a disaster. There is an emphasis placed on practicing fire-making skills before venturing into the wilderness. Producing fire under adverse conditions has been made much easier by the introduction of tools such as the magnesium striker, solar spark lighter, and the fire piston.
Water
A human being can survive an average of three to five days without water. Since the human body is composed of an average of 60% water, it should be no surprise that water is higher on the list than food. The need for water dictates that unnecessary water loss by perspiration should be avoided in survival situations. Perspiration and the need for water increase with exercise. Although human water intake varies greatly depending on factors like age and sex, the average human should drink about 13 cups or 3 liters per day. Many people in survival situations perish due to dehydration, and/or the debilitating effects of water-borne pathogens from untreated water.
A typical person will lose a minimum of two to four liters of water per day under ordinary conditions, and more in hot, dry, or cold weather. Four to six liters of water or other liquids are generally required each day in the wilderness to avoid dehydration and to keep the body functioning properly. The U.S. Army survival manual does not recommend drinking water only when thirsty, as this leads to inadequate hydration. Instead, water should be consumed at regular intervals. Other groups recommend rationing water through "water discipline."
A lack of water causes dehydration, which may result in lethargy, headaches, dizziness, confusion, and eventually death. Even mild dehydration reduces endurance and impairs concentration, which is dangerous in a survival situation where clear thinking is essential. Dark yellow or brown urine is a diagnostic indicator of dehydration. To avoid dehydration, a high priority is typically assigned to locating a supply of drinking water and making provisions to render that water as safe as possible.
Recent thinking is that boiling or commercial filters are significantly safer than the use of chemicals, with the exception of chlorine dioxide.
Food
Culinary root tubers, fruit, edible mushrooms, edible nuts, edible beans, edible cereals or edible leaves, edible cacti, ants and algae can be gathered and, if needed, prepared (mostly by boiling). With the exception of leaves, these foods are relatively high in calories, providing some energy to the body. Plants are some of the easiest food sources to find in the jungle, forest, or desert because they are stationary and can thus be obtained without exerting much effort. Animal trapping, hunting, and fishing allow a survivalist to acquire high-calorie meat but require certain skills and equipment (such as bows, snares, and nets).
Focusing on survival until rescued, the Boy Scouts of America especially discourages foraging for wild foods on the grounds that the knowledge and skills needed to make a safe decision are unlikely to be possessed by those finding themselves in a wilderness survival situation.
Navigation
When going on a hike or trip in an unfamiliar location, search and rescue advises to notify a trusted contact of your destination, your planned return time, and then notify them when returning. In the event you do not return in the specified time frame, (e.g. 12 hours of the scheduled return time), your contact can contact the police for search and rescue.
Survival situations can often be resolved by finding a way to safety, or a more suitable location to wait for rescue. Types of navigation include:
Celestial navigation, using the sun and the night sky to locate the cardinal directions and to maintain course of travel
Using a map, compass or GPS receiver
Dead reckoning
Natural navigation, using the condition of surrounding natural objects (i.e. moss on a tree, snow on a hill, direction of running water, etc.)
Mental preparedness
Mental clarity and preparedness are critical to survival. The will to live in a life-and-death situation often separates those that live and those that do not. Even well-trained survival experts may be mentally affected in disaster situations. It is critical to be calm and focused during a disaster.
To the extent that stress results in hellish testing of
human limits, the benefits of learning to function under stress and determining those limits may outweigh the downside of stress. There are certain strategies and mental tools that can help people cope better in a survival situation, including focusing on manageable tasks, having a Plan B available, and recognizing denial.
Urban survival
Earthquake
Governments such as the United States and New Zealand advise that in an earthquake, one should "Drop, Cover, and Hold."
New Zealand Civil Defense explains it this way:
DROP down on your hands and knees. This protects you from falling but lets you move if you need to.
COVER your head and neck (or your entire body if possible) under a sturdy table or desk (if it is within a few steps of you). If there is no shelter nearby, cover your head and neck with your arms and hands.
HOLD on to your shelter (or your position to protect your head and neck) until the shaking stops. If the shaking shifts your shelter around, move with it.
The United States Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) adds that in the event of a building collapse, it is advised that you:
Seek protection under a structure like a table
Cover your mouth with your shirt to filter out dust
Don't move until you are confident that something won't topple on you
Use your phone light to signal for help, or call
Important survival items
Survivalists often carry a "survival kit." The contents of these kits vary considerably, but generally consist of items that are necessary or useful in potential survival situations, depending on the anticipated needs and location. For wilderness survival, these kits often contain items like a knife, water vessel, fire-starting equipment, first aid equipment, tools to obtain food (such as snare wire, fish hooks, or firearms), a light source, navigational aids, and signaling or communications devices. Multi-purpose tools are often chosen because they serve multiple purposes, allowing the user to reduce weight and save space.
Preconstructed survival kits may be purchased from various retailers, or individual components may be bought and assembled into a kit.
Controversial survival skills
Some survival books promote the "Universal Edibility Test." Allegedly, it is possible to distinguish edible foods from toxic ones by exposing your skin and mouth to progressively greater amounts of the food in question, with waiting periods and checks for symptoms between these exposures. However, even a small amount of some "potential foods" can cause physical discomfort, illness, or even death. Furthermore, some plants present negative symptoms only when consumed in larger doses, so this testing method may lead to intoxication in these cases.
Many mainstream survival experts have recommended the act of drinking urine in times of dehydration and malnutrition. However, the U.S. Army Survival Field Manual (FM 21–76) instructs that this technique is a myth and should never be used. There are several reasons to avoid drinking urine, including the high salt content of urine, potential contaminants, and the risk of bacterial exposure, despite urine often being touted as "sterile."
Many classic western movies, classic survival books, and even some school textbooks suggest that using your mouth to suck the venom out of a venomous snake bite is an appropriate treatment. However, venom that has entered the bloodstream cannot be sucked out, and it may be dangerous for a rescuer to attempt to do so. Similarly, some survivalists promote the belief that when bitten by a venomous snake, drinking your urine provides natural anti-venom. Effective snakebite treatment involves pressure bandages and prompt medical treatment, and may require antivenom.
Seizonjutsu
Seizonjutsu (生存術) are survival skills such as gathering, hunting tracking etc. used in Ninjutsu and expertise in meteorology, botanics and training for physical strength to endure hardships in the outback.

Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) is a training concept originally developed by the British during World War II. It is best known by its military acronym and prepares a range of Western forces to survive when evading or being captured. Initially focused on survival skills and evading capture, the curriculum was designed to equip military personnel, particularly pilots, with the necessary skills to survive in hostile environments. The program emphasised the importance of adhering to the military code of conduct and developing techniques for escape from captivity. Following the foundation laid by the British, the U.S. Air Force formally established its own SERE program at the end of World War II and the start of the Cold War. This program was extended to include the Navy and United States Marine Corps and was consolidated within the Air Force during the Korean War (1950–1953) with a greater focus on "resistance training."
In 1940, the British government established the Special Operations Executive (SOE) to train operatives in evasion and resistance techniques, supporting resistance movements in occupied Europe. These efforts throughout the 1940s laid the foundation for formal SERE programs, which focused on survival, evasion, and resistance, ensuring that military personnel were equipped to perform effectively under potential captivity scenarios.
During the Vietnam War (1959–1975), there was clear need for "jungle" survival training and greater public focus on American POWs. As a result, the U.S. military expanded SERE programs and training sites. In the late 1980s, the U.S. Army became more involved with SERE as Special Forces and "spec ops" grew. Today, SERE is taught to a variety of personnel based upon risk of capture and exploitation value with a high emphasis on aircrew, special operations, and foreign diplomatic and intelligence personnel.
History
Origins
The concept of SERE (Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape) training was first developed by the British during World War II. The United Kingdom initiated survival training for their aircrew, focusing on skills needed for evasion and survival in hostile environments. This laid the groundwork for the formalised SERE programs that were later expanded upon by other countries, including the United States.
During World War II, private citizens from France and Belgium created and financed escape and evasion lines as early as 1940 to help Allied soldiers and airmen stranded or shot down behind enemy lines evade capture by the German occupiers of western Europe. Britain's MI9 Evasion and Escape (E&E) organization began to help the escape lines once the British realized they could be effective. Led by World War I veteran Colonel (later Brigadier) Norman Crockatt, MI9 were formed to train air crew and Special Forces in evading enemy troops following bail-out, forced landings, or being cut off behind enemy lines. A training school was established in London, and officers and instructors from MI9 also began visiting operational air bases, providing local training to air crews unable to be detached from their duties to attend formal courses. MI9 went on to devise a multitude of evasion and escape tools; These tools included overt items to aid immediate evasion after bailing out and covert items for use to aid escape following capture which were hidden within uniforms and personal items (concealed compasses, silk and tissue maps, etc.).
Once the United States entered the war in 1941, MI9 staff traveled to Washington, D.C., to discuss their now mature E&E training, devices, and proven results with the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF). As a result, the United States initiated their own Evasion and Escape organization, known as MIS-X, based at Fort Hunt, Virginia.
There were also several unofficial private "clubs" created during World War II by British and American pilots who had escaped from German forces during the war and returned to friendly lines. One such club was the "Late Arrivals' Club". This strictly nonmilitary club had a flying boot which was worn under the left collar of a uniform as its identifying symbol.
USAAF General Curtis LeMay realized that it was cheaper and more effective to train aircrews in Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape techniques than to have them lost in the arctic (or ocean) or languishing (or lost) in enemy hands. Thus, he supported the establishment of formal SERE training at several bases/locations (from July 1942 to May 1944) hosting the 336th Bombardment Group (now the 336th Training Group), including a small program for Cold Weather Survival at Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) Station Namao in Edmonton, Alberta, where American, British, and Canadian B29 aircrews received basic survival training. In 1945, a consolidated survival training center was initiated at Fort Carson, Colorado, under the 3904th Training Squadron, and, in 1947, the Arctic Indoctrination Survival School (colloquially known as "the Cool School") opened at Marks Air Force Base in Nome, Alaska.
During WWII, the U.S. Navy discovered that 75% of its pilots who had been shot or forced down came down alive, yet barely 5% of them survived because they could not swim or find sustenance in the water or on remote islands. Since the ability to swim was an essential survival skill for Navy pilots, training programs were developed to ensure pilot trainees could swim (requiring cadets to swim one mile and dive 50 feet underwater to be able to escape bullets and suction from sinking aircraft). Soon, the training was expanded to include submerged aircraft escape.
During the Korean War (1950–1953), the Air Force moved their survival school to Stead AFB, Reno Stead Airport as the 3635th Combat Crew Training Wing. In 1952, the United States Department of Defense (DoD) designated the United States Air Force (USAF) as executive agent (EA, as below) for joint escape and evasion.
The Korean War showed that traditional notions about captives during wartime were no longer valid as North Koreans, with Chinese backing, ignored the Geneva Conventions regarding treatment of POWs. This mistreatment was especially true for American airmen because of North Korean hatred of bombardments and airmen's prestige among soldiers. North Koreans were interested in the propaganda value of American captives given their new methods for gaining compliance, extracting confessions, and gathering information, which proved successful against American soldiers.
A change in focus
Soon after the Korean War ended, the DoD initiated the Defense Advisory Committee on Prisoners of War to study and report on the problems and possible solutions regarding the Korean War POW fiasco. The charter of the committee was to find a suitable approach for preparing the U.S. armed forces to deal with the combat and captivity environment.
The committee's key recommendation was the implementation of a military "Code of Conduct" that embodied traditional American values as moral obligations of soldiers during combat and captivity. Underlying this code was the belief that captivity was to be thought of as an extension of the battlefield; i.e., as a place where soldiers were expected to accept death as a possible duty. President Eisenhower then issued Executive Order 10631 which stated: "All members of the Armed Forces of the United States are expected to measure up to the standards embodied in this Code of Conduct while in combat or in captivity." The U.S. military likewise began the process for training and implementing this directive.
While it was accepted that the Code of Conduct would be taught to all U.S. soldiers at the earliest point of their military training, the Air Force believed more was needed. At the USAF "Survival School" (Stead AFB), the concepts of evasion, resistance, and escape were expanded and new curricula were developed as "Code of Conduct Training". Those curricula have remained the foundation of modern SERE training throughout the U.S. military.
The Navy also recognized the need for new training, and by the late 1950s, formal SERE training was initiated at "Detachment SERE" Naval Air Station Brunswick in Maine with a 12-day Code of Conduct course designed to give Navy pilots and aircrew the skills necessary to survive and evade capture, and if captured, resist interrogation and escape. Later, the course was expanded so that other Navy and Marine Corps troops, such as SEALs, SWCC, EOD, RECON / MARSOC, and Navy Combat Medics would attend. Subsequently, a second school was opened at Naval Air Station North Island. The Marine Corps opened their Pickel Meadow camp (initially established by Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton) in 1951, where Marines would be trained in outdoor survival and, later, opened the Mountain Warfare Training Center (MCMWTC) in Bridgeport, California, where training could be done in Level A SERE (as below). "Survival training" for soldiers has ancient origins as survival is a goal of combat. Survival training was not distinct from "combat training" until navies realized the need to teach sailors to swim. Such training was not related to combat and was intended solely to help sailors survive. Similarly, firefighting training has long been a navy focus and remains so today (although survival of the ship may be the primary goal). Water survival training has been a distinct and formal part of Navy basic training since World War II, although its importance was greatly increased with the advent and expansion of naval aviation.
In 1953, the Army established the "Jungle Operations Training Center" at Fort Sherman in Panama (known as "Green Hell"). Operations there were ramped up during the 1960s to meet the demand for jungle-trained soldiers in Vietnam. In 1958, the Marine Corps opened Camp Gonsalves in northern Okinawa, Japan, where jungle warfare and survival training was offered to soldiers headed for Vietnam. As the Vietnam War progressed, the Air Force also opened a "Jungle Survival School" at Clark Air Base and the Navy opened the Jungle Environmental Survival Training School at Naval Air Station Cubi Point in the Philippines.
When Stead AFB closed in 1966, the USAF "survival school" was moved to Fairchild Air Force Base in Washington State (where it is centered today). The Air Force also had other survival schools including the "Tropical Survival School" at Howard Air Force Base in the Panama Canal Zone, the "Arctic Survival School" at Eielson Air Force Base, Alaska, and the "Water Survival School" at Homestead Air Force Base, Florida, which operated under separate commands. In April 1971, these schools were brought under the same Group and squadrons were organized to conduct training at Clark, Fairchild and Homestead, while detachments were used for other localized survival training (the acronym "SERE" was not used extensively in the Air Force until later in the 1970s).
In 1976, following accusations and reports of abuses during Navy SERE training, DoD established a committee (i.e., "Defense Review Committee") to examine the need for changes in Code of Conduct training. After hearing from experts and former POWs, they recommended the standardization of SERE training among all branches of the military and the expansion of SERE to include "lessons learned from previous US Prisoner of War experiences" (intending to make the training more "realistic and useful").
In late 1984, the Pentagon issued DoD Directive 1300.7 which established three levels of SERE training with the "resistance portion" incorporated at "Level C". That level of training was specified for soldiers whose "assignment has a high risk of capture and whose position, rank, or seniority make them vulnerable to greater than average exploitation efforts by a captor".
While initially only four military bases (Fairchild AFB, SERE), Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, Naval Air Station North Island, and Camp Mackall (at Fort Bragg) were officially authorized to conduct Level C training, other bases have been added (such as Fort Novosel). Individual bases may conduct SERE courses which include C-level elements (see "Schools" below). The required (every 3 years) Level C refresher course is commonly taught by USAF "detachments" (often just one SERE specialist/instructor) stationed at a base or a traveling specialist.
As the designated executive agency for U.S. military SERE training, the USAF's 336th Training Group continues to provide the only U.S. military career SERE specialists and instructors who are part of Air Force Special Warfare Operations and are utilized in varied roles throughout the Air Force and DoD. See USAF "Survival Instructors".
Selecting an Executive Agency
The DoD defines Executive Agency as "the Head of a DOD Component to whom the Secretary of Defense (SECDEF) or the Deputy Secretary of Defense (DEPSECDEF) has assigned specific responsibilities, functions, and authorities to provide defined levels of support for operational missions, or administrative or other designated activities that involve two or more of the DOD Components." DoD chose the U.S. Air Force as its Executive Agency for joint escape and evasion in 1952 and it was therefore the candidate to be chosen as the EA for SERE and CoC training in 1979. The Air Force remained EA for most survival, evasion, escape and rescue related matters until 1995. But, with the growing importance of personnel recovery (PR), the United States Department of Defense established the Joint Services Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) Agency (JSSA) in 1991 and designated it the DoD EA for DoD Prisoner of War / Missing in Action (POW / MIA) matters. In 1994 the JSSA was designated as the central organizer and implementer for PR and the USAF as the EA for Joint Combat Search and Rescue (JCSAR) Combat search and rescue. In 1999, the JPRA Joint Personnel Recovery Agency was created as an agency under the Commander in Chief, US Joint Forces Command (USJFCOM) and was named the Office of Primary Responsibility (OPR) for DoD-wide PR matters. JPRA has been designated a Chairman's Controlled Activity since 2011.
JPRA has its headquarters at Fort Belvoir and as organizing agency (OA) for all DoD "resistance" training, it has close ties with the 336th Training Group (which was given the role of organizing and operating the Personnel Recovery Academy or PRA). JPRA and the PRA now coordinate PR activities and train PR/SERE globally with American allies making extensive use of USAF SERE experts.
USAF "Survival Instructors"/SERE Specialists
The first USAF "survival instructors" were experienced civilian wilderness volunteers and USAF personnel with prior instructor experience (and they included a small cadre of "USAF Rescuemen", i.e. United States Air Force Pararescue). When the Army Air Forces formed the Air Rescue Service (ARS) in 1946, the 5th Rescue Squadron conducted the first Pararescue and Survival School at MacDill Air Force Base in Florida. With the move to Stead AFB and the opening of a full-time survival school, the USAF initiated the military's only full-time, career survival instructor program (with the Air Force Specialty Code 921). By the time the Air Force opened the survival school at Fairchild AFB in 1966, it also opened a separate "Instructor Training Branch" (ITB) under the 3636th Combat Crew Training Squadron where all Air Force Survival Instructors received their specialist training, composed of six months of classroom and field training, and initial qualification rating, which was "Global Survival Instructor". They then had to complete six months of On-the-Job Training (OJT) before they were qualified to teach SERE (aka "Combat Survival Training" or "CST"). Years of additional training for added specialties (such as arctic, jungle, tropics, and water survival, "resistance training", and "academic instruction") yield some of the most trained personnel in the U.S. military.
Currently, USAF SERE specialist/instructor training is conducted under the 66th Training Squadron at Fairchild AFB. After selection and qualification conducted at Lackland Air Force Base, Texas via a SERE specialist orientation course, potential SERE instructors are assigned to the 66th Training Squadron to learn how to instruct SERE in any environment: the "field" survival course at Fairchild, the non-ejection water survival course at Fairchild AFB (which trains aircrew members of non-parachute-equipped aircraft), and the resistance training orientation course (which covers the theories and principles needed to conduct Level C Code of Conduct resistance training laboratory instruction). USAF SERE specialists also earn their jump wings at the United States Army Airborne School. SERE Specialists who work in the "dunker" portion of the water survival course at Fairchild are certified through the Navy Salvage Dive Course. The SERE training instructor "7-level" upgrade course is a 19-day course that provides SERE instructors with advanced training in barren Arctic, barren desert, jungle, and open-ocean environments.
The Air Force's SERE instructors play key roles in DoD-wide training and in implementing other branches SERE training programs; both the Navy and Army send their SERE instructors to take the basic 9-day SERE course (SV-80-A) taught by the 22nd TS since these other branches have no career option for SERE. Because the Air Force has the largest and best trained SERE staff, it assumes diverse roles DoD wide, such as furnishing SERE training for Red Flag exercises.
Curriculum
SERE curriculum has evolved from being primarily focused on "outdoor survival training" to increasingly focus upon "evasion, resistance, and escape". Military survival training differs from typical civilian programs in several key areas:
The anticipated military survival situation almost always begins with exiting a vehicle – an aircraft or ship. Thus, the scenario begins with exit strategies, practices, and means (ejecting, parachuting, underwater escape, etc.).
Military survival training has greater focus on specialized military survival equipment, survival kits, signaling, rescue techniques, and recovery methods.
Military personnel are almost always better prepared for survival situations because of obvious inherent risk in their activities (and their training and equipment). Conversely, military personnel are subject to a much wider variety of likely scenarios as any given mission may expose them to a wide variety of risks, environments, and injuries.
In almost all military survival situations someone knows you're missing and will be looking for you with advanced equipment and pre-established protocols.
Military survival often involves exposure to an enemy. The basic survival skills taught in SERE programs include common outdoor/wilderness survival skills such as firecraft, sheltercraft, first aid, water procurement and treatment, food procurement (traps, snares, and wild edibles), improvised equipment, self-defense (natural hazards), and navigation (map and compass, etc.). More advanced survival training focuses on mental elements such as will to survive, attitude, and "survival thinking" (situational awareness, assessment, prioritization).
Military survival schools also teach unique skills such as parachute landings, basic and specialized signalling, vectoring a helicopter, use of rescue devices (forest-tree penetrators, harnesses, etc.), rough terrain travel, and interaction with indigenous peoples.
Combat survival
The military "has an obligation to the American people to ensure its soldiers go into battle with the assurance of success and survival. This is an obligation that only rigorous and realistic training, conducted to standard, can fulfill". The U.S. Army has long taken survival training as an integral part of combat readiness (per FM 7-21.13 "The Soldier's Guide") and combat training is largely about an individual soldier's survival as opposed to the enemy's non-survival. "Survival", as a distinct part of modern military training, largely emerges in special environment operations (as shown in "Mountain Operations", FM 3-97.6, "Jungle School", the Marine Corps' mountain warfare training center, the Air Force's Desert and Arctic Survival Schools (as above), and the Navy's Naval Special Warfare Cold Weather Detachment Kodiak).
Certain skills have been identified that enhance every soldier's chance for survival (whether they are on the battlefield or not):
Use weapons properly and effectively
Move safely and efficiently through various terrains
Navigate from one point to another given point on the ground
Communicate as needed
Perform first aid (evaluate, stabilize, and transport)
Identify and react properly to hazards
Select and utilize offensive and defensive positions
Maintain personal health and readiness
Evade, resist, and escape (aka "kidnapping and hostage survival")
Know and utilize emergency procedures, survival equipment, and recovery systems
Military survival
Military personnel are often subject to enhanced risks and unique situations and, therefore, beyond basic combat skills and specialty skills, many U.S. military personnel receive training in survival skills specific to their assignment. Such general survival training may include the basics listed above along with:
Special survival equipment and procedures (specific vehicle exiting, first aid kits, etc.)
Communication devices, practices, and procedures
Navigation devices (e.g. GPS)
Specialty rescue devices (e.g. forest penetrator, personal lowering and hoisting devices, etc.)
Special survival practices and procedures (shipboard firefighting, abandon ship procedures, liferafts, etc.)
Preparing for survival (mission briefings, personal survival gear/kits, special knowledge, etc.)
Situational awareness and assessment / Understanding the mission environment: hazards and opportunities
Prioritizing needs and planning actions for personal protection, survival, and recovery (survival decisions)
If an enemy is involved – evasion (camouflage, travel techniques, et al.).
Signaling (radios, mirrors, fire/smoke, flares, markers)
Rescue contact and recovery procedures
Evasion, resistance, and escape
Evading an enemy consists of certain well-known basic skills, but the military has an interest in not openly discussing its practices since this may assist an enemy. Major militaries spend considerable time and energy preparing for evasion with extensive planning (routes, practices, pick-up points, methods, "friendlies", "chits", weapons, etc.). Some elements of hostile survival preparedness and teaching are classified. This is especially true for "resistance" training where one hopes to prepare those who might be captured for hardship, stress, abuse, torture, interrogation, indoctrination, and exploitation.
The foundation for capture preparedness lies in knowing one's duty and rights if taken prisoner. For American soldiers, this begins with the Code of the United States Fighting Force. It is:
I am an American, fighting in the forces which guard my country and our way of life. I am prepared to give my life in their defense.
I will never surrender of my own free will. If in command, I will never surrender the members of my command while they still have the means to resist.
If I am captured, I will continue to resist by all means available. I will make every effort to escape and to aid others to escape. I will accept neither parole nor special favors from the enemy.
If I become a prisoner of war, I will keep faith with my fellow prisoners. I will give no information nor take part in any action which might be harmful to my comrades. If I am senior I will take command. If not, I will obey the lawful orders of those appointed over me and will back them up in every way.
When questioned, should I become a prisoner of war, I am required to give name, rank, service number, and date of birth. I will evade answering further questions to the utmost of my ability, I will make no oral or written statements disloyal to my country and its allies or harmful to their cause.
I will never forget that I am an American, fighting for freedom, responsible for my actions, and dedicated to the principles which made my country free. I will trust in my God and in the United States of America.
Training on how to survive and resist an enemy in the event of capture is generally based on past experiences of captives and prisoners of war. Thus, it is important to know who one's captors are likely to be and what to expect from them. Intelligence regarding such things is sensitive, but in the modern era, captives are less likely to enjoy the status of "prisoner of war" and so to gain protections under the Geneva Conventions. American soldiers are still taught the standards of international law for humanitarian treatment in war, but they are less likely to receive those protections than to offer them.
Because details cannot be offered, a few examples of well-known resistance methods provide clues as to the nature of resistance techniques:
Use of a tap code to secretly communicate between captives.
When U.S. Navy Commander Jeremiah Denton was forced to appear at a televised press conference, he repeatedly blinked the word "T-O-R-T-U-R-E" with Morse code.
The "code" of prisoners at the "Hanoi Hilton" Hỏa Lò Prison: "Take physical torture until you are right at the edge of losing your ability to be rational. At that point, lie, do, or say whatever you must do to survive. But you first must take physical torture."
A pilot POW who gave the name of comic book heroes when his captors demanded the name of his fellow pilots.
Much from The Great Escape.
The teaching of "resistance" is typically done in a "simulation laboratory" setting where "resistance training" instructors act as hostile captors and soldier-students are treated as realistically as possible as captives/POWs with isolation, harsh conditions, close confinement, stress, mock interrogation, and torture "simulations". While it is impossible to simulate the reality of hostile captivity, such training has proven very effective in helping those who have endured captivity know what to expect of their captivity and themselves under such conditions.
Code of Conduct training levels
Under current DoD public policy, SERE Code of Conduct (aka "Resistance") training has three levels:
Level A: Entry level training. These are the Code of Conduct classes (now commonly taken online) required for all military personnel – normally at recruit training, "basic" and "OCS" Officer Candidate School.
Level B: For those operating or expected to operate forward of the division rear boundary and up to the forward line of own troops (FLOT). Normally limited to aircrew of the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, and Air Force. Level B focuses on survival and evasion, with resistance in terms of initial capture.
Level C: For troops at a high risk of capture and whose position, rank, or seniority make them vulnerable to greater than average exploitation efforts by any captor. Level C training focuses on resistance to exploitation and interrogation, survival during isolation and captivity, and escape from hostiles (e.g., "prison camps").
"Escape Training" has elements similar to evasion and resistance training – if details are revealed, it potentially helps adversaries. Much of this training has to do with observation, planning, preparation, and contingencies. And much of this comes from historical experience so public sources are revealing (such as the movies The Great Escape (film) and Rescue Dawn).
Special survival situations
1. Water (ocean, river, littoral) Survival: Military personnel are much more likely to find themselves in a water survival situation than others. How to survive in water is taught at Navy Recruit Training, Navy SUBSCOL Submarine Escape Training, the Air Force Water Survival Course and at a separate SoF Special Forces Professional Military Education (PME) courses. Featured in such courses are topics and exercises such as:
Underwater escape from vessel/vehicle (from submarines to aircraft)
Water parachute landing
Swimming out from under a parachute
Dealing with rough water
Boarding and getting out of a life raft
Life in a raft
Use of aquatic survival gear
Aquatic environment hazards
Aquatic environment first aid (seasickness, immersion injuries, animal injuries)
Food and water procurement and preparation
Drown-proofing, swimming, flotation
Special Psychological Concerns
2. Arctic (sea ice, tundra) Survival: Air Force aircrews spend considerable time flying over arctic regions Polar Routes and while modern arctic survival situations are rare, the training remains useful and worthwhile because its content obviously relates to winter survival anywhere. All U.S. military branches have some type of cold/winter/mountain survival training originating from hard-learned lessons during the Korean War (see above and below). Dealing with cold conditions presents several unique content areas:
Cold injuries: frostbite, hypothermia, chilblains, immersion foot
Snow/Ice/Cold Issues: snow blindness, avalanches/ice fall, icebergs, wind chill, shock therapy (internal or external)
Staying Warm
Why an igloo or snow cave is far better than a tent
Firecraft
Saving calories, burning calories, and finding calories.
Arctic/Snow Travel
Water
Hazards of moisture/Keeping dry
3. Desert Survival: While desert survival training was part of U.S. military survival courses since their inception (see Air Forces Manual No. 21) the focus of survival training went that direction in 1990 with Operation Desert Shield Gulf War (1990–1991). Desert survival training is likely to remain a major focus in the foreseeable future. While there is a common mistake to think of deserts as hot, much of the Arctic (and Antarctic) is also polar desert. And under the definition of desert climate (a climate in which there is an excess of evaporation over precipitation), some deserts are deemed "cold weather deserts" such as the Gobi Desert. Because the unifying feature of all deserts is a lack of water, that is the focus for desert survival:
Conserve water (but don't over-do it): If it's hot, avoid perspiration; if it's cold, avoid dehydrating respiration
Understanding dehydration
Water sources in arid regions
Hot desert – shelter by day, move/act by night
Cold desert – trap breath moisture
Desert shelters (above or below surface)
Desert garb
Desert hazards and treatments
Desert signaling
Desert travel
4. Jungle/Tropics Survival: Staying alive in the jungle is relatively easy, but doing so comfortably can be very difficult. There are good reasons why soldiers deemed JWS (Jungle Warfare School) in Panama "Green Hell":
The jungle environment: conditions (wet, wetter, wettest) heat index
Jungle hazards
Jungle ailments: trench foot, insect bites, bad food, bad water, parasites, snake bite
Food
Water preparation/treatment
Jungle shelter(s)
Firecraft
Jungle improvisation
Jungle signalling and rescue
5. Isolation Survival: Isolation is not just "being alone", it's being away from the familiar and comforting. Isolation survival has long been part of SERE in the "resistance" portion of training, but has more recently been recognized as worthy of broader attention. The psychological impact of suddenly finding yourself alone, lost, or outside your "comfort zone" can be debilitating, seriously depressing, and even fatal (via panic). Isolation survival also focuses upon the broader view of captivity to include kidnapping and non-combatant captivity. Isolation survival training has more focus on psychological preparedness and less upon "skills".
Understanding and avoiding panic
The importance of "keeping your wits about you"
Focus, Observe, Plan, and Envision ("FOPE")
Stress "fight or flight" coping response, the "stress cycle", and things to help you stay calm.
The psychology of captivity
U.S. military SERE/Survival Schools and courses
There has been growth in private sector SERE Schools and training, which has made it difficult for the U.S. military to keep their well-trained and highly experienced SERE instructors because of lucrative private sector opportunities.
Branch distinctions for SERE have become less clear or relevant since the creation of the Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA). Because the JPRA has "primary responsibility for DoD-wide personnel recovery matters," (which specifically includes Level C SERE training), it integrates, coordinates, mandates, and draws from all military branches as needed. It is also worthy to note that much of military SERE is viewed as "joint operations" and cross-branch training is common (or required). SERE training detachments (usually, USAF) often work with different branches, especially where bases have been combined as "Joint Bases" and for update/review training. In that regard, designating schools by branch may be less meaningful.
SERE 100.2 (J3TA-US1329) is a joint services Level A SERE education and training course supporting the military-wide "Code of Conduct" training requirement. It is 4 hour course available on-line or as an on-base classroom course.
It is common practice for joint operation SERE training to be conducted at, through, or in conjunction with individual military bases.
U.S. Army
The Army position statement on SERE training is clear: "The Army has an obligation to the American people to ensure its soldiers go into battle with the assurance of success and survival. This is an obligation that only rigorous and realistic training, conducted to standard, can fulfill." Like all military branches, the Army operates under DOD Directive 1300.7 which requires and specifies Code of Conduct training for military personnel. Because the Army views a large portion of its training as "survival" related and since the Army has more soldiers than the other branches, there are many modes and schools for survival and SERE training (as indicated above and below). Army Airborne School, for example is largely about surviving parachute jumps but is not deemed a "survival school". US Army Green Berets, Army Rangers, Delta Force and other SoF soldiers receive extensive survival training as an inherent part of their overall combat training (as well as specific SERE training).
The mission of the United States Army SERE training is "to ensure each student gains the ability to effectively employ the SERE tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) necessary to return with honor regardless of the circumstances of separation, isolation or capture."
The major "specialized schools" and courses for Army SERE training include:
John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School (SWCS) at Camp Mackall where Army Special Operations Forces (ARSOF) personnel complete their respective qualification course with a 19-day SERE course (including the Special Operations Forces' (ARSOF) Resistance Training Laboratory (RTL)) that includes Level C training.
Army Aviation School at Fort Novosel where 21 days of SERE training is included in the Army aviators curriculum. The program has a Level C course with both academics and resistance training labs. The Basic Officer's Leadership Course (BOLC) includes introductory SERE training including Helicopter Over-water Survival Training (HOST). The SERE Level C course exposes students to various captor exploitation efforts including interrogation (eight methods), indoctrination, propaganda, video propaganda, concessions, forced labor, and reprisals. A simulated captivity environment provides experience which includes wartime, peacetime governmental detention, and hostage detention scenarios with content involving resistance postures, techniques and strategies, establishing overt and covert organizations, establishing overt and covert communications, and planning and executing escapes in captivity environments.
Northern Warfare Training Center (NWTC) at Black Rapids, Alaska (administered from Fort Wainwright) where several courses are intended to maintain the U.S. Army's abilities in cold weather and mountain warfare. The Cold Weather Orientation Course (CWOC), Cold Weather Indoctrination Course (CWIC), and Basic Military Mountaineering Course (BMMC) each have specific "survival" sections.
Desert Warrior Course outside of Fort Bliss, Texas where a 20-day desert warfare course emphasizes the "individual strain on the body from the heat, sun, high winds and dryness." There is also special focus on desert hazards ("rattlesnakes, cobras, vipers, scorpions, tarantulas, camel spiders, coyotes, camels, big cats and antelope") and related medical skills.
U.S. Navy
The USN Center for Security Forces (CENSECFOR) of the Naval Education and Training Command (NETC) at Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek–Fort Story promulgates the Navy's SERE training. The mission of the Command is "to educate and train those who serve, providing the tools and opportunities which enable life-long learning, professional and personal growth and development, ensuring fleet readiness and mission accomplishment; and to perform such other functions and tasks assigned by higher authority". This includes basic survival training for all Navy sailors and DOD Directive 1300.7 requiring "Code of Conduct" training (as above). The major Navy SERE schools and courses include:
The Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) School (A-2D-4635 or E-2D-0039) at CENSECFOR Detachment SERE East, Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, New Hampshire offers several SERE courses including the outdoor/field course at the Navy Remote Training Site, Kittery, Maine, a "Risk of Isolation Brief" course, and the SERE Instructor Under Training course. The school employs approximately 100 military and civilian personnel and trains an average of 1,200 students per year.
Cold Weather Environmental Survival Training (CWEST) at Rangeley, Maine – the US Navy's only cold weather survival school.
The Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) School (A-2D-4635 or E-2D-0039) at CENSECFOR Detachment SERE West, Naval Air Station North Island, California provides all levels of "Code of Conduct" training for Recon Marines, Marine Corps Scout Snipers, MARSOC Marines, Navy SEALs, enlisted Navy and Marine aircrew, Naval Aviators, Naval Flight Officers, Naval Flight Surgeons, Navy EOD, and Navy SWCC. The school operates the Navy Remote Training Site at Warner Springs where sailors and marines learn basic skills necessary for worldwide survival, facilitating search and rescue efforts, and evading capture by hostile forces. Additional Level C Code of Conduct training includes a five-day Peacetime Detention and Hostage Survival (PDAHS) course providing skills to survive captivity by a hostile government or terrorist cell during peacetime.
Recruit Training Command's Water Survival Division at Naval Station Great Lakes (NAVSTA Great Lakes), Illinois offers introductory survival training including: basic sea survival training; lifeboat organization, survival kit contents and usage, abandon ship procedures, and swim qualification (3rd class).
Naval Special Warfare (NSW) SERE (K-431-0400), Naval Special Warfare Center, Coronado, California (mostly classified personnel recovery TTPs).
Naval Aviation Survival Training Centers: The Navy operates eight water survival training centers for its aviators (Miramar, Jacksonville, Norfolk, Cherry Point, Pensacola, Patuxent River, Lemorre, and Whidbey Island).
Naval Special Warfare Advanced Training Command (NSWATC) courses (4) providing advanced training related to SERE and Personnel Recovery (PR) to Naval Special Warfare (NSW) trainees (SEAL/Special Warfare Combatant-craft Crewman pipeline students and Combat Support/Combat Service Support (CS/CSS) personnel) and other select groups at Kodiak, Alaska and Virginia Beach, Virginia.
U.S. Air Force
The Air Education and Training Command (AETC) has over 60,000 personnel and is responsible for all Air Force training programs, including SERE training. In AETC, the 336th Training Group at Fairchild AFB, Washington has the mission to "provide high risk of isolation personnel with the skills and confidence to "Return With Honor" regardless of the circumstances of isolation." It is also the largest U.S. Military SERE training provider training more than 20,000 students, in 19 different courses, each year."
As with the other branches, the Air Force offers a wide scope of survival training within other courses, but unique to the Air Force is the stationing of career SERE specialists at bases around the world as renewal and upgrade SERE instructors, advisors, and PR specialists. In the mid-80s, the USAF Combat "Desert" Survival Course was established by the 3636th Combat Crew Training Wing and USAF Survival Training Schools began emphasizing "Combat SERE Training" (CST) instead of "Global SERE Training". The primary Air Force survival schools/courses are:
Arctic Survival School – the "Cool School" offered by the 66th TRS, Det. 1, at Eielson AFB, Alaska – a five-day course consisting of both classroom instruction and a 3-day field experience where students from all military branches along with "the Coast Guard, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and other organizations that find their members operating in arctic conditions" get to build snow shelters, trap rabbits, and deal with being cold.
SERE Specialist Selection Course offered by the 66th TRS, Det. 3, at Lackland AFB, Texas – a rigorous pre-screening intended to save the Air Force time and money, and students needless pain and suffering.
Evasion and Conduct After Capture (ECAC) Course, also conducted by the 66th TRS, Det. 3 at Lackland. A Level B code of Conduct course that may act as partial/preparation course for Level C Code of Conduct (completed elsewhere).
Non-ejection Water Survival offered by the 22d TRS at Fairchild – a 2-day course with an obvious focus.
SV-80-A – the USAF aircrew SERE course is the largest in the military with 6,000+ attendees in an average year. This 19-day course mixes classroom, field, and "laboratory" (captive simulation) experiences to prepare students to "Return with Honor". The course is the "standard" for Level C Code of Conduct training and is offered broadly beyond the Air Force.
JPRA courses: The Personnel Recovery Academy is located with the SERE school at Fairchild and there is significant overlap in instruction and facility. The west coast JPRA facility is just across the highway at White Bluffs where separate Level C(+) training is offered (mostly classified).
SV-81-A – the U.S. military's only career SERE Specialist Course is offered by the 66th TRS at the Air Force Survival School at Fairchild Air Force Base, Washington and other regional locations. After a grueling selection process, successful students relocate to Fairchild, where they experience what they will teach by completing the SV-80-A course. Then they undertake a series of challenging field training exercises over a 5-month period to develop broad first-hand knowledge and experience in different terrains, weather, and situations (and differing gear). Those who graduate (less than 10%) are awarded the Sage Beret (with insignia pin), SERE Arch and SERE Flash – only to enter another 45 weeks of intensive on-the-job training. At some point, graduates must complete Airborne School. After completion of 3–4 years as a "field instructor," specialists may be tasked to train students worldwide. USAF SERE specialists are encouraged to complete an associate degree in survival and rescue sciences through the USAF Community College to continue to advance in the SERE career field. (SERE Specialists complete additional qualification training at specialized schools as required. Examples are Scuba Courses, Military Freefall Parachuting, Altitude chamber, etc. Assignment to each of the outlying schools requires additional training by the SERE Specialist. Upon reporting to the new assignment, each SERE specialist must first complete that school's course (the same as an aircrew member), and then be trained by the school's cadre in the specialized subject matter (and carry crews under supervision) before the newly assigned specialist is "qualified" to teach without supervision. At Edwards AFB, USAF SERE specialists are tasked as "test parachutists" and required to perform multiple jumps on newly introduced / modified rescue systems, aircraft, and parachuting and / or ejection systems. This includes test parachuting newly designed canopies, harnesses, etc. Currently, they are the only test parachutists in the Department of Defense. USAF SERE specialists are considered DOD-wide subject matter experts in their field and are assigned to base level and command staff as advisers).
Combat Survival Training (CST) taught at the Air Force Academy (AFA) in Colorado. Since 2011, this program has been significantly reduced (following problems and controversies detailed below). With most academy graduates now required to attend the SV-80-A course at Fairchild, the AFA program is limited to some survival and Level B Code of Conduct training. As of 2022, the course has been reintroduced to the AFA curriculum, with the intent of providing all AFA Cadets and select Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC) Cadets with accredited Level B SERE training.
Marine Corps
"Preserving the lives and well-being of U.S. military, Department of Defense (DoD) civilians, and DoD contractors authorized to accompany the force (CAAF) who are in danger of becoming, or already are beleaguered, besieged, captured, detained, interned, or, otherwise missing or evading capture (hereafter referred to as "isolated") while participating in U.S.-sponsored activities or missions, is one of the highest priorities of the DoD. The DoD has an obligation to train, equip, and protect its personnel, to prevent their capture and exploitation by adversaries, and to reduce the potential for the use of isolated personnel as leverage against U.S. security objectives. Personnel Recovery (PR) is the sum of military, diplomatic, and civil efforts to prepare for and execute the recovery and reintegration of isolated personnel." MSGID/GENADMIN/CG MCCDC QUANTICO VA REF/A/DODI O-3002.05//REF/B/CJCSM 3500.09//REF/C/MCO 3460.3| MARADMINS Number: 286/18 23 May 2018 announcing that "Training and Education Command (TECOM) in a joint effort with U.S. Army Forces Command, and with the assistance of the Joint Personal Recovery Agency, has developed a SERE Level A Training Support Package (TSP) that enables deploying units to self-train SERE Level A in an instructor guided group setting."
The U.S. Marine Corps operates jointly with the Navy and cooperatively with the other branches in much of its SERE training, but operates its own Level C course at the Full Spectrum SERE Course, U.S. Marines Special Operations School (MSOS), Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. Marine Spec Ops often train with Navy Spec Ops and utilize Navy training when it fits their needs and there is no equivalent USMC course. The Corps like to stand apart and have their own specifications for required "Code of Conduct" training:
Level A is taught to recruits and candidates in Officer Candidate School and the Recruit Depots, or under professional military education (but note the JPRA note above).
Level B is taught at the Marine Corps Mountain Warfare Training Center, Bridgeport, California, and at the North Training Area, Camp Gonsalves, Okinawa Prefecture, Japan.
Level C is held at Camp Lejeune, as above, although some Marine personnel are trained at the Navy facilities listed above.
USMC courses or training with survival focus include:
Full Spectrum SERE Training taught by the MARSOC Personnel Recovery (PR)/ SERE Branch at Camp Lejeune provides 19 days of full spectrum Level C SERE training to MARSOC personnel encompassing Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTP) to plan for evasion, effect personnel recovery, survive and evade capture in austere environments and resist exploitation appropriately, in accordance with the Code of Conduct, should they become captured or detained. The training consists of classroom academic instruction, vicarious learning evolutions consisting of Academic Role-Play Laboratories (ARL), field survival exercises, an evasion exercise, experiential resistance training laboratories (RTL), an urban movement phase and a course debrief.
Mountain Warfare Training Center (MWTC) at Pickel Meadows in the Toiyabe National Forest (≈20 miles northwest of Bridgeport, California) offers "specialized training in technical climbing, military mountaineering, snow mobility, field craft, survival, CASEVAC, navigation, use of pack animals and high angle marksmanship. Medical challenges include treatment of high altitude and cold weather illness and injuries, and casualty transport in a snow covered mountainous environment."
Special Operations Training Course (SOTC) is taught at the Marine Raider Training Center (MRTC) at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina in four phases under the general title Individual Training Course (ITC). The entire course includes six months of unhindered, realistic, challenging basic and intermediate Special Operations Forces (SOF) war fighting skills training. In the ten-week Phase I portion, Marines learn basic Spec Ops skills including SERE (Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape), TCCC (Tactical Combat Casualty Care), fire support training and communications. Survivability is a focus in all phases of the ITC course.
Jungle Warfare Training Center (JWTC) offers various courses taught by the 3d Marine Division at Camp Gonsalves, Okinawa, Japan. The skills, leaders, and endurance courses intend to teach Marines the skills they need should they become separated from their units in a combat zone and must survive off the land while evading the enemy. The Jungle Tracking, Trauma, and Medicine Courses have more specific goals. The rigorous eight-day Basic Skills Course teaches skills such as first aid, communication, booby traps, knot tying, rappelling, and land navigation. Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape training (SERE) is conducted monthly and includes a 12-day course, 3 days of classroom learning of the basics of survival (how to identify and catch food, build tools, start fires and construct shelter), 5 days on a beach where the Marines survive on their own (with nothing but a knife, a canteen and the uniforms on their backs), and 4 days of "team" evasion through the muddy and tangled jungle (to avoid being captured by students from the man-tracking course). Captured student get placed into an improvised POW camp and the instructors interrogate them to test their "resistance" skills.
Marines often participate in "exercises" and some of them have a survival focus.
Allegations of misuse
President George W. Bush's January 2002 declaration that the Geneva Conventions regarding POWs did not apply to the conflict with Al-Qaeda or the Taliban as those "detainees" were not entitled to POW status or those legal guarantees of humane treatment has led to serious problems for SERE training. The military Code of Conduct, based upon American adherence to the Geneva Conventions related to treatment of prisoners of war, gave American soldiers some legal and moral argument for their right to such protections. To soldiers who are legally required to follow the directives of their commander-in-chief, this declaration offered a potential excuse for harsh techniques or even torture by American personnel or those who captured Americans. (As such, a soldier's claim that this was an "unlawful order" would be a difficult defense to establish because the specific legal definition of torture – "intended to inflict severe physical or mental pain or suffering" – remains unresolved in many contexts. An alleged torturer's intent is hard to prove, and the meaning of "severe" in this application is discretely debated as well.)
From its origins in the 1950s, the "Resistance" portion of SERE was based upon a firm belief in and commitment to the protections of the Geneva conventions (as above). That opposing forces chose to ignore those protections was the very reason for creating the Code of Conduct and the ensuing development of "Resistance Training" (as above). However, some have argued that SERE's "Resistance" protocols were subverted by the U.S. military, and that it used Resistance-rooted training designed to help soldiers resist illegal and immoral means of torture for purposes of actively engaging in the torture of Guantanamo POWs. These allegations remain unproven, however, though some persist in conflating "SERE techniques" in misguided fashion with alleged incidents of "detainee interrogation/torture" by CIA and U.S. military personnel.
By definition, there are no "SERE techniques" involving torture: the "R" in SERE is about "Resistance training," intended solely to assist American POWs (or captives) in resisting unlawful force or methods intended to compel them to act against their fellow prisoners or their honor as soldiers. Nonetheless, the collective actions of the U.S. military as well as military contractors – including tangible proof of torture in some locations, most infamously Abu Ghraib – has raised questions over whether certain SERE techniques were inappropriately used.
Allegations of SERE training misuse
An online magazine article from June 2006 referenced a 2005 document obtained by the American Civil Liberties Union through the Freedom of Information Act in which the former chief of the Interrogation Control Element at Guantanamo Bay said "SERE instructors" taught their methods to interrogators of the prisoners in Cuba. The article also stated that physical and mental techniques used against some detainees at Abu Ghraib Prison are similar to the ones SERE students are taught to resist.
According to Human Rights First, the interrogation that led to the death of Iraqi Major General Abed Hamed Mowhoush involved the use of techniques used in SERE training. Human Rights First claimed that "internal FBI memos and press reports have pointed to SERE training as the basis for some of the harshest techniques authorized for use on detainees by the Pentagon in 2002 and 2003."
On June 17, 2008, Mark Mazzetti of The New York Times reported that the senior Pentagon lawyer Mark Schiffrin requested information in 2002 from the leaders of the Air Force's captivity-resistance program, referring to one based in Fort Belvoir, Virginia. The information was later used on prisoners in military custody. In written testimony presented in a Senate Armed Forces Committee hearing, Col. Steven Kleinman of the Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA) said a team of trainers whom he was leading in Iraq were asked to demonstrate SERE techniques on uncooperative prisoners. He refused, but his decision was overruled. He was quoted as saying, "When presented with the choice of getting smarter or getting tougher, we chose the latter." Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has acknowledged that the use of the SERE program techniques to conduct interrogations in Iraq was discussed by senior White House officials in 2002 and 2003.
It was subsequently confirmed that in 2002 JPRA was asked by the CIA to provide advisors on topics such as "deprivation techniques ... exploitation and questioning techniques, and developing countermeasures to resistance techniques." While the identities of the alleged JPRA instructors have never been confirmed or denied, a number of media sources continued referring to them as "SERE instructors." JPRA has no direct relation to SERE, and many of its resistance training instructors are not SERE instructors (they are from the Air Force Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Agency).
Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture
On December 9, 2014, the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence released a report ("SASC report", hereafter) which detailed how contractors who developed the "enhanced interrogation techniques" used by U.S. personnel received US$81 million for their services and identified the contractors, who were referred to in the report via pseudonyms, as principals in Mitchell, Jessen & Associates from Spokane, Washington. Two of them were psychologists, John "Bruce" Jessen and James Mitchell. Jessen was a senior psychologist at the Defense Department who had worked with Army special forces in resistance training. The report states that the contractor "developed the list of enhanced interrogation techniques and personally conducted interrogations of some of the CIA's most significant detainees using those techniques. The contractors also evaluated whether the detainees' psychological state allowed for continued use of the techniques, even for some detainees they themselves were interrogating or had interrogated." Mitchell, Jessen & Associates developed a "menu" of 20 potential enhanced techniques including waterboarding, sleep deprivation and stress positions.
Over the six years following their hiring, Mitchell, Jessen & Associates would hire over 100 staff, bill the CIA for over $80 million, and lead the American military (and other parts of the government) into one of their largest public relations fiascos in modern times. When 60 Minutes aired pictures from Abu Ghraib in May 2004, the shock was "heard around the world." Americans, for the most part, began hearing of "SERE" for the first time during this period. While Mitchell, Jessen & Associates claim to have hired ex-"SERE instructors," it has never been established how many, if any, were ever legitimate SERE instructors; how many were, in reality, private contractors who used (or, more likely, misused) the title "SERE Instructor; or how many CIA operatives may have misleadingly referred to themselves as "SERE interrogators," solely because they used stolen and/or distorted SERE training techniques. They were purportedly derived from classified training materials, both historical and instructional in nature, that were used for curriculum development in military and JPRA Level-C "resistance training."
SERE abuses and scandals
USAFA "sex abuse" during resistance training: See 2003 United States Air Force Academy sexual assault scandal. The United States Air Force Academy has had several sex/sex abuse scandals, some involving SERE. In 1993 a female cadet stated that she was particularly selected as a participant in a simulated rape and exploitation scenario where, while hooded and other cadets stood by, she had to lie on the ground with her shirt removed and her legs pried apart. The subsequent investigations failed to affirm the allegations and she filed a lawsuit that was confidentially settled out-of-court. In 1995, abuse allegations were made by one male cadet: "They dressed me up as a woman. They put me in a skirt, put makeup all over my face, and made me follow around one of the [instructors] like his little toy." The cadet also claimed that while he was tied to a bench, another cadet was forced to "get on top of me and act like he's having sex with me." Following this allegation, cadet SERE training was suspended until 1998 when it resumed without the "Sexual Exploitation" element.
USN waterboarding during resistance training (ordered stopped in 2007 by JPRA): "For years, the U.S. military used waterboarding, a centuries-old torture technique, to train American troops to resist interrogation if captured." JPRA (the controlling agency) compelled the Army and Navy to discontinue simulated waterboard training in 2007.
Claims of psychological and/or physical harm from resistance training: It has been suggested that training exercises during SERE courses are harsh enough to cause students to become "psychologically defeated" and impaired in the ability to develop "psychological hardiness."
Claims of resistance training involving "torture": "The experience of torture at SERE [school] surely plays a role in the minds of the graduates who go on to be interrogators, and it must on some level help them rationalize their actions." The most credible claim of simulations escalating into torture come from an internal JPRA memorandum regarding North Island SERE school waterboarding, which says, in part: "Out of the four water boards we observed, the instructor did not stop watering students when they started tapping their toes, but instead continued watering until stopped by the watch officer or until the totally defeated student gave an answer through the water. In one case two full canteen cups were poured after the student started tapping..." (The tapping of toes is an instructional signal given to students so they may temporarily stop the training simulation.)

A sword is an edged, bladed weapon intended for manual cutting or thrusting. Its blade, longer than that of a knife or dagger, is attached to a hilt and can be straight or curved. A thrusting sword tends to have a straighter blade with a pointed tip. A slashing sword is more likely to be curved and to have a sharpened cutting edge on one or both sides of the blade. Many swords are designed for both thrusting and slashing. The precise definition of a sword varies by historical epoch and geographic region.
Historically, the sword developed in the Bronze Age, evolving from the dagger; the earliest specimens date to about 1600 BC. The later Iron Age sword remained fairly short and without a crossguard. The spatha, as it developed in the Late Roman army, became the predecessor of the European sword of the Middle Ages, at first adopted as the Migration Period sword, and only in the High Middle Ages, developed into the classical arming sword with crossguard. The word sword continues the Old English, sweord.
The use of a sword is known as swordsmanship or, in a modern context, as fencing. In the early modern period, western sword design diverged into two forms, the thrusting swords and the sabres.
Thrusting swords such as the rapier and eventually the smallsword were designed to impale their targets quickly and inflict deep stab wounds. Their long and straight yet light and well balanced design made them highly maneuverable and deadly in a duel but fairly ineffective when used in a slashing or chopping motion. A well aimed lunge and thrust could end a fight in seconds with just the sword's point, leading to the development of a fighting style which closely resembles modern fencing.
Slashing swords such as the sabre and similar blades such as the cutlass were built more heavily and were more typically used in warfare. Built for slashing and chopping at multiple enemies, often from horseback, the sabre's long curved blade and slightly forward weight balance gave it a deadly character all its own on the battlefield. Most sabres also had sharp points and double-edged blades, making them capable of piercing soldier after soldier in a cavalry charge. Sabres continued to see battlefield use until the early 20th century. The US Navy M1917 Cutlass used in World War I was kept in their armory well into World War II and many Marines were issued a variant called the M1941 Cutlass as a makeshift jungle machete during the Pacific War.
Non-European weapons classified as swords include single-edged weapons such as the Middle Eastern scimitar, the Chinese dao and the related Japanese katana. The Chinese jiàn 剑 is an example of a non-European double-edged sword, like the European models derived from the double-edged Iron Age sword.
History
Prehistory and antiquity
Bronze Age
The first weapons that can be described as "swords" date to around 3300 BC. They have been found in Arslantepe, Turkey, are made from arsenical bronze, and are about 60 cm (24 in) long. Some of them are inlaid with silver.
The sword developed from the knife or dagger. The sword became differentiated from the dagger during the Bronze Age (c. 3000 BC), when copper and bronze weapons were produced with long leaf-shaped blades and with hilts consisting of an extension of the blade in handle form. A knife is unlike a dagger in that a knife has only one cutting surface, while a dagger has two cutting surfaces. Construction of longer blades became possible during the 3rd millennium BC in the Middle East, first in arsenic copper, then in tin-bronze.
Blades longer than 60 cm (24 in) were rare and not practical until the late Bronze Age because the Young's modulus (stiffness) of bronze is relatively low, and consequently longer blades would bend easily. The development of the sword out of the dagger was gradual; the first weapons that can be classified as swords without any ambiguity are those found in Minoan Crete, dated to about 1700 BC, reaching a total length of more than 100 cm (39 in). These are the "type A" swords of the Aegean Bronze Age.
One of the most important, and longest-lasting, types of swords of the European Bronze Age was the Naue II type (named for Julius Naue who first described them), also known as Griffzungenschwert (lit. 'grip-tongue sword'). This type first appears in c. the 13th century BC in Northern Italy (or a general Urnfield background), and survives well into the Iron Age, with a life-span of about seven centuries. During its lifetime, metallurgy changed from bronze to iron, but not its basic design.
Naue II swords were exported from Europe to the Aegean, and as far afield as Ugarit, beginning about 1200 BC, i.e. just a few decades before the final collapse of the palace cultures in the Bronze Age collapse. Naue II swords could be as long as 85 cm (33 in), but most specimens fall into the 60 to 70 cm (24 to 28 in) range. Robert Drews linked the Naue Type II Swords, which spread from Southern Europe into the Mediterranean, with the Bronze Age collapse. Naue II swords, along with Nordic full-hilted swords, were made with functionality and aesthetics in mind. The hilts of these swords were beautifully crafted and often contained false rivets in order to make the sword more visually appealing. Swords coming from northern Denmark and northern Germany usually contained three or more fake rivets in the hilt.
Sword production in China is attested from the Bronze Age Shang dynasty. The technology for bronze swords reached its high point during the Warring States period and Qin dynasty. Amongst the Warring States period swords, some unique technologies were used, such as casting high tin edges over softer, lower tin cores, or the application of diamond shaped patterns on the blade (see sword of Goujian). Also unique for Chinese bronzes is the consistent use of high tin bronze (17–21% tin) which is very hard and breaks if stressed too far, whereas other cultures preferred lower tin bronze (usually 10%), which bends if stressed too far. Although iron swords were made alongside bronze, it was not until the early Han period that iron completely replaced bronze.
In the Indian subcontinent, earliest available Bronze age swords of copper were discovered in the Indus Valley civilization sites in the northwestern regions of South Asia. Swords have been recovered in archaeological findings throughout the Ganges-Jamuna Doab region of Indian subcontinent, consisting of bronze but more commonly copper. Diverse specimens have been discovered in Fatehgarh, where there are several varieties of hilt. These swords have been variously dated to times between 1700 and 1400 BC. Other swords from this period in India have been discovered from Kallur, Raichur.
Iron Age
Iron became increasingly common from the 13th century BC. Before that the use of swords was less frequent. The iron was not quench-hardened although often containing sufficient carbon, but work-hardened like bronze by hammering. This made them comparable or only slightly better in terms of strength and hardness to bronze swords. They could still bend during use rather than spring back into shape. But the easier production, and the better availability of the raw material for the first time permitted the equipping of entire armies with metal weapons, though Bronze Age Egyptian armies were sometimes fully equipped with bronze weapons.
Ancient swords are often found at burial sites. The sword was often placed on the right side of the corpse. Many times the sword was kept over the corpse. In many late Iron Age graves, the sword and the scabbard were bent at 180 degrees. It was known as killing the sword. Thus they might have considered swords as the most potent and powerful object.
Indian antiquity
High-carbon steel for swords, which would later appear as Damascus steel, was likely developed in India around the mid-1st millennium BC. The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea mentions swords of Indian iron and steel being exported from ancient India to ancient Greece. Blades from the Indian subcontinent made of Damascus steel also found their way into Persia.
Greco-Roman antiquity
By the time of Classical Antiquity and the Parthian and Sassanid Empires in Iran, iron swords were common. The Greek xiphos and the Roman gladius are typical examples of the type, measuring some 60 to 70 cm (24 to 28 in). The late Roman Empire introduced the longer spatha (the term for its wielder, spatharius, became a court rank in Constantinople), and from this time, the term longsword is applied to swords comparatively long for their respective periods.
Swords from the Parthian and Sassanian Empires were quite long, the blades on some late Sassanian swords being just under a metre long.
Swords were also used to administer various physical punishments, such as non-surgical amputation or capital punishment by decapitation. The use of a sword, an honourable weapon, was regarded in Europe since Roman times as a privilege reserved for the nobility and the upper classes.
Persian antiquity
In the first millennium BC, the Persian armies used a sword that was originally of Scythian design called the akinaka (acinaces). However, the great conquests of the Persians made the sword more famous as a Persian weapon, to the extent that the true nature of the weapon has been lost somewhat as the name akinaka has been used to refer to whichever form of sword the Persian army favoured at the time.
It is widely believed that the original akinaka was a 35 to 45 cm (14 to 18 in) double-edged sword. The design was not uniform and in fact identification is made more on the nature of the scabbard than the weapon itself; the scabbard usually has a large, decorative mount allowing it to be suspended from a belt on the wearer's right side. Because of this, it is assumed that the sword was intended to be drawn with the blade pointing downwards ready for surprise stabbing attacks.
In the 12th century, the Seljuq dynasty had introduced the curved shamshir to Persia, and this was in extensive use by the early 16th century.
Chinese antiquity
Chinese iron swords made their first appearance in the later part of the Western Zhou dynasty, but iron and steel swords were not widely used until the 3rd century BC Han dynasty. The Chinese dao (刀 pinyin dāo) is single-edged, sometimes translated as sabre or broadsword, and the jian (劍 or 剑 pinyin jiàn) is double-edged. The zhanmadao (literally "horse chopping sword") is an extremely long, anti-cavalry sword from the Song dynasty era.
Middle Ages
Europe
Early and High Middle Ages
During the Middle Ages, sword technology improved, and the sword became a very advanced weapon. The spatha type remained popular throughout the Migration period and well into the Middle Ages. Vendel Age spathas were decorated with Germanic artwork (not unlike the Germanic bracteates fashioned after Roman coins). The Viking Age saw again a more standardized production, but the basic design remained indebted to the spatha.
Around the 10th century, the use of properly quenched hardened and tempered steel started to become much more common than in previous periods. The Frankish 'Ulfberht' blades (the name of the maker inlaid in the blade) were of particularly consistent high quality. Charles the Bald tried to prohibit the export of these swords, as they were used by Vikings in raids against the Franks.
Wootz steel (which is also known as Damascus steel) was a unique and highly prized steel developed on the Indian subcontinent as early as the 5th century BC. Its properties were unique due to the special smelting and reworking of the steel creating networks of iron carbides described as a globular cementite in a matrix of pearlite. The use of Damascus steel in swords became extremely popular in the 16th and 17th centuries.
It was only from the 11th century that Norman swords began to develop the crossguard (quillons). During the Crusades of the 12th to 13th century, this cruciform type of arming sword remained essentially stable, with variations mainly concerning the shape of the pommel. These swords were designed as cutting weapons, although effective points were becoming common to counter improvements in armour, especially the 14th-century change from mail to plate armour.
It was during the 14th century, with the growing use of more advanced armour, that the hand and a half sword, also known as a "bastard sword", came into being. It had an extended grip that meant it could be used with either one or two hands. Though these swords did not provide a full two-hand grip they allowed their wielders to hold a shield or parrying dagger in their off hand, or to use it as a two-handed sword for a more powerful blow.
In the Middle Ages, the sword was often used as a symbol of the word of God. The names given to many swords in mythology, literature, and history reflected the high prestige of the weapon and the wealth of the owner.
Late Middle Ages
From around 1300 to 1500, in concert with improved armour, innovative sword designs evolved more and more rapidly. The main transition was the lengthening of the grip, allowing two-handed use, and a longer blade. By 1400, this type of sword, at the time called langes Schwert (longsword) or spadone, was common, and a number of 15th- and 16th-century Fechtbücher offering instructions on their use survive. Another variant was the specialized armour-piercing swords of the estoc type. The longsword became popular due to its extreme reach and its cutting and thrusting abilities.
The estoc became popular because of its ability to thrust into the gaps between plates of armour. The grip was sometimes wrapped in wire or coarse animal hide to provide a better grip and to make it harder to knock a sword out of the user's hand.
A number of manuscripts covering longsword combat and techniques dating from the 13th–16th centuries exist in German, Italian, and English, providing extensive information on longsword combatives as used throughout this period. Many of these are now readily available online.
In the 16th century, the large zweihänder was used by the elite German and Swiss mercenaries known as doppelsöldners. Zweihänder, literally translated, means two-hander. The zweihänder possesses a long blade, as well as a huge guard for protection. It is estimated that some zweihänder swords were over 6 feet (1.8 m) long, with the one ascribed to Frisian warrior Pier Gerlofs Donia being 7 feet (2.13 m) long. The gigantic blade length was perfectly designed for manipulating and pushing away enemy polearms, which were major weapons around this time, in both Germany and Eastern Europe. Doppelsöldners also used katzbalgers, which means 'cat-gutter'. The katzbalger's S-shaped guard and 2-foot-long (0.61 m) blade made it perfect for bringing in when the fighting became too close to use a zweihänder.
Civilian use of swords became increasingly common during the late Renaissance, with duels being a preferred way to honourably settle disputes.
The side-sword was a type of war sword used by infantry during the Renaissance of Europe. This sword was a direct descendant of the knightly sword. Quite popular between the 16th and 17th centuries, they were ideal for handling the mix of armoured and unarmoured opponents of that time. A new technique of placing one's finger on the ricasso to improve the grip (a practice that would continue in the rapier) led to the production of hilts with a guard for the finger. This sword design eventually led to the development of the civilian rapier, but it was not replaced by it, and the side-sword continued to be used during the rapier's lifetime. As it could be used for both cutting and thrusting, the term "cut and thrust sword" is sometimes used interchangeably with side-sword. As rapiers became more popular, attempts were made to hybridize the blade, sacrificing the effectiveness found in each unique weapon design. These are still considered side-swords and are sometimes labeled sword rapier or cutting rapier by modern collectors.
Side-swords used in conjunction with bucklers became so popular that it caused the term swashbuckler to be coined. This word stems from the new fighting style of the side-sword and buckler which was filled with much "swashing and making a noise on the buckler".
Within the Ottoman Empire, the use of a curved sabre called the yatagan started in the mid-16th century. It would become the weapon of choice for many in Turkey and the Balkans.
The sword in this time period was the most personal weapon, the most prestigious, and the most versatile for close combat, but it came to decline in military use as technology, such as the crossbow and firearms changed warfare. However, it maintained a key role in civilian self-defence.
Middle East
The earliest evidence of curved swords, or scimitars (and other regional variants as the Arabian saif, the Persian shamshir and the Turkic kilij) is from the 9th century, when it was used among soldiers in the Khurasan region of Persia.
Africa
The takoba is a type of broadsword originating in the western Sahel, descended from various Byzantine and Islamic swords. It has a straight double-edged blade measuring about one meter in length, usually imported from Europe.
Abyssinian swords related to the Persian shamshir are known as shotel. The Asante people adopted swords under the name of akrafena. They are still used today in ceremonies, such as the Odwira festival.
East Asia
As steel technology improved, single-edged weapons became popular throughout Asia. Derived from the Chinese jian or dao, the Korean hwandudaedo are known from the early medieval Three Kingdoms. Production of the Japanese tachi, a precursor to the katana, is recorded from c. AD 900 (see Japanese sword).
Japan was famous for the swords it forged in the early 13th century for the class of warrior-nobility known as the Samurai. Western historians have said that Japanese katana were among the finest cutting weapons in world military history. The types of swords used by the Samurai included the ōdachi (extra long field sword), tachi (long cavalry sword), katana (long sword), and wakizashi (shorter companion sword for katana). Japanese swords that pre-date the rise of the samurai caste include the tsurugi (straight double-edged blade) and chokutō (straight one-edged blade). Japanese swordmaking reached the height of its development in the 15th and 16th centuries, when samurai increasingly found a need for a sword to use in closer quarters, leading to the creation of the modern katana. High quality Japanese swords have been exported to neighboring Asian countries since before the 11th century. From the 15th century to the 16th century, more than 200,000 swords were exported, reaching a quantitative peak, but these were simple swords made exclusively for mass production, specialized for export and lending to conscripted farmers (ashigaru).
South Asia
The khanda is a double-edge straight sword. It is often featured in religious iconography, theatre and art depicting the ancient history of India. Some communities venerate the weapon as a symbol of Shiva. It is a common weapon in the martial arts in the Indian subcontinent. The khanda often appears in Hindu, Buddhist and Sikh scriptures and art. In Sri Lanka, a unique wind furnace was used to produce the high-quality steel. This gave the blade a very hard cutting edge and beautiful patterns. For these reasons it became a very popular trading material.
The firangi (, derived from the Arabic term for a Western European, a "Frank") was a sword type which used blades manufactured in Western Europe and imported by the Portuguese, or made locally in imitation of European blades. Because of its length the firangi is usually regarded as primarily a cavalry weapon. The sword has been especially associated with the Marathas, who were famed for their cavalry. However, the firangi was also widely used by Sikhs and Rajputs.
The talwar (Hindi: तलवार) is a type of curved sword from India and other countries of the Indian subcontinent, it was adopted by communities such as Rajputs, Sikhs and Marathas, who favored the sword as their main weapon. It became more widespread in the medieval era.
The urumi (Tamil: சுருள் பட்டாக்கத்தி surul pattai, lit. curling blade; Sinhala: එතුණු කඩුව ethunu kaduwa; Hindi: aara) is a "sword" with a flexible whip-like blade.
Southeast Asia
In Indonesia, the images of Indian style swords can be found in Hindu gods statues from ancient Java circa 8th to 10th century. However the native types of blade known as kris, parang, klewang and golok were more popular as weapons. These daggers are shorter than a sword but longer than a common dagger.
In the Philippines, traditional large swords known as kampilans and panabas were used in combat by the natives. A notable wielder of the kampilan was Lapu-Lapu, the king of Mactan and his warriors who defeated the Spaniards and killed Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan at the Battle of Mactan on 27 April 1521. Traditional swords in the Philippines were immediately banned, but the training in swordsmanship was later hidden from the occupying Spaniards by practices in dances. But because of the banning, Filipinos were forced to use swords that were disguised as farm tools. Bolos and baliswords were used during the revolutions against the colonialists not only because ammunition for guns was scarce, but also for concealability while walking in crowded streets and homes. Bolos were also used by young boys who joined their parents in the revolution and by young girls and their mothers in defending the town while the men were on the battlefields. During the Philippine–American War in events such as the Battle of Balangiga, most of an American company was hacked to death or seriously injured by bolo-wielding guerillas in Balangiga, Samar. When the Japanese took control of the country, several American special operations groups stationed in the Philippines were introduced to Filipino martial arts and swordsmanship, leading to this style reaching America despite the fact that natives were reluctant to allow outsiders in on their fighting secrets.
Pre-Columbian Americas
The macuahuitl is a wooden broadsword and club that was utilized by various Mesoamerican civilizations, such as those of the Aztecs, Maya, Olmecs, Toltecs, and Mixtecs.
Pacific Islands
In the Gilbert Islands, the native Kiribati people have developed a type of broadsword made from shark teeth, which serves a similar function to the leiomano used by the Native Hawaiians.
Early modern history
Military sword
A single-edged type of sidearm used by the Hussites was popularized in 16th-century Germany under its Czech name dusack, also known as Säbel auf Teutsch gefasst ("sabre fitted in the German manner"). A closely related weapon is the schnepf or Swiss sabre used in Early Modern Switzerland.
The cut-and-thrust mortuary sword was used after 1625 by cavalry during the English Civil War. This (usually) two-edged sword sported a half-basket hilt with a straight blade some 90–105 cm long. Later in the 17th century, the swords used by cavalry became predominantly single-edged. The so-called walloon sword (épée wallone) was common in the Thirty Years' War and Baroque era. Its hilt was ambidextrous with shell-guards and knuckle-bow that inspired 18th-century continental hunting hangers. Following their campaign in the Netherlands in 1672, the French began producing this weapon as their first regulation sword. Weapons of this design were also issued to the Swedish army from the time of Gustavus Adolphus until as late as the 1850s.
Duelling sword
The rapier is believed to have evolved either from the Spanish espada ropera or from the swords of the Italian nobility somewhere in the later part of the 16th century. The rapier differed from most earlier swords in that it was not a military weapon but a primarily civilian sword. Both the rapier and the Italian schiavona developed the crossguard into a basket-shaped guard for hand protection.
During the 17th and 18th centuries, the shorter small sword became an essential fashion accessory in European countries and the New World, though in some places such as the Scottish Highlands large swords as the basket-hilted broadsword were preferred, and most wealthy men and military officers carried one slung from a belt. Both the small sword and the rapier remained popular dueling swords well into the 18th century.
As the wearing of swords fell out of fashion, canes took their place in a gentleman's wardrobe. This developed to the gentlemen in the Victorian era to use the umbrella. Some examples of canes—those known as sword canes or swordsticks—incorporate a concealed blade. The French martial art la canne developed to fight with canes and swordsticks and has now evolved into a sport. The English martial art singlestick is very similar.
With the rise of the pistol duel, the duelling sword fell out of fashion long before the practice of duelling itself. By about 1770, English duelists enthusiastically adopted the pistol, and sword duels dwindled. However, the custom of duelling with epées persisted well into the 20th century in France. Such modern duels were not fought to the death; the duellists' aim was instead merely to draw blood from the opponent's sword arm.
Late modern history
Military sidearm
Towards the end of its useful life, the sword served more as a weapon of self-defense than for use on the battlefield, and the military importance of swords steadily decreased during the Modern Age. Even as a personal sidearm, the sword began to lose its preeminence in the early 19th century, reflecting the development of reliable handguns.
However, swords were still normally carried in combat by cavalrymen and by officers of other branches throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, both in colonial and European warfare. For example, during the Aceh War the Acehnese klewangs, a sword similar to the machete, proved very effective in close quarters combat with Dutch troops, leading the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army to adopt a heavy cutlass, also called klewang (very similar in appearance to the US Navy Model 1917 Cutlass) to counter it. Mobile troops armed with carbines and klewangs succeeded in suppressing Aceh resistance where traditional infantry with rifle and bayonet had failed. From that time on until the 1950s the Royal Dutch East Indies Army, Royal Dutch Army, Royal Dutch Navy and Dutch police used these cutlasses called Klewang.
Swords continued in general peacetime use by cavalry of most armies during the years prior to World War I. The British Army formally adopted a completely new design of cavalry sword in 1908, almost the last change in British Army weapons before the outbreak of the war. At the outbreak of World War I infantry officers in all combatant armies then involved (French, German, British, Austro-Hungarian, Russian, Belgian and Serbian) still carried swords as part of their field equipment. On mobilization in August 1914 all serving British Army officers were required to have their swords sharpened as the only peacetime use of the weapon had been for saluting on parade. The high visibility and limited practical use of the sword however led to it being abandoned within weeks, although most cavalry continued to carry sabres throughout the war. While retained as a symbol of rank and status by at least senior officers of infantry, artillery and other branches, the sword was usually left with non-essential baggage when units reached the front line. It was not until the late 1920s and early 1930s that this historic weapon was finally discarded for all but ceremonial purposes by most remaining horse mounted regiments of Europe and the Americas.
In China troops used the long anti-cavalry miao dao well into the Second Sino-Japanese War. The last units of British heavy cavalry switched to using armoured vehicles as late as 1938. Swords and other dedicated melee weapons were used occasionally by many countries during World War II, but typically as a secondary weapon as they were outclassed by coexisting firearms. A notable exception was the Imperial Japanese Army where, for cultural reasons, all officers and warrant officers carried the shin-gunto ("new military sword") into battle from 1934 until 1945.
Ceremonial use
Swords are commonly worn as a ceremonial item by officers in many military and naval services throughout the world. Occasions to wear swords include any event in dress uniforms where the rank-and-file carry arms: parades, reviews, courts-martial, tattoos, and changes of command. They are also commonly worn for officers' weddings, and when wearing dress uniforms to church—although they are rarely actually worn in the church itself.
In the British forces, swords are also worn for any appearance at Court. In the United States, some Navy and Marine officers are required to own a sword, which can be prescribed for any formal outdoor ceremonial occasion. They are also worn by Non-Commissioned Officers in some circumstances.
Civilian officials and police
During the 19th and early 20th centuries certain categories of non-military officials wore swords as symbols of authority or status. Most commonly seen were those of various police forces (notably in Imperial Germany, France and other European states). Seldom effective as weapons these were eventually replaced by batons or hand guns.
Until the 20th century light epees were commonly worn as part of the ceremonial civil uniforms prescribed for diplomats, government ministers and senior colonial administrators on formal occasions.
Religious
In the occult practices of Wicca, a sword or knife often referred to as an athame is used as a magical tool.
Sword replicas
The production of replicas of historical swords originates with 19th-century historicism. Contemporary replicas can range from cheap factory produced look-alikes to exact recreations of individual artifacts, including an approximation of the historical production methods.
Some kinds of swords are still commonly used today as weapons, often as a side arm for military infantry. The Japanese katana, wakizashi and tantō are carried by some infantry and officers in Japan and other parts of Asia and the kukri is the official melee weapon for Nepal. Other swords in use today are the sabre, the scimitar, the shortsword and the machete.
In the case of a rat-tail tang, the maker welds a thin rod to the end of the blade at the crossguard; this rod goes through the grip.
In traditional construction, Swordsmiths peened such tangs over the end of the pommel, or occasionally welded the hilt furniture to the tang and threaded the end for screwing on a pommel. This style is often referred to as a "narrow" or "hidden" tang. Modern, less traditional, replicas often feature a threaded pommel or a pommel nut which holds the hilt together and allows dismantling.
In a "full" tang (most commonly used in knives and machetes), the tang has about the same width as the blade, and is generally the same shape as the grip.
Morphology
The sword consists of the blade and the hilt. The term scabbard applies to the cover for the sword blade when not in use.
Blade
There is considerable variation in the detailed design of sword blades. The diagram opposite shows a typical Medieval European sword.
Early iron blades have rounded points due to the limited metallurgy of the time. These were still effective for thrusting against lightly armoured opponents. As armour advanced, blades were made narrower, stiffer and sharply pointed to defeat the armour by thrusting.
Dedicated cutting blades are wide and thin, and often have grooves known as fullers which lighten the blade at the cost of some of the blade's stiffness. The edges of a cutting sword are almost parallel. Blades oriented for the thrust have thicker blades, sometimes with a distinct midrib for increased stiffness, with a strong taper and an acute point. The geometry of a cutting sword blade allows for acute edge angles. An edge with an acuter angle is more inclined to degrade quickly in combat situations than an edge with a more obtuse angle. Also, an acute edge angle is not the primary factor of a blade's sharpness.
The part of the blade between the center of percussion (CoP) and the point is called the foible (weak) of the blade, and that between the center of balance (CoB) and the hilt is the forte (strong). The section in between the CoP and the CoB is the middle.
The ricasso or shoulder identifies a short section of blade immediately below the guard that is left completely unsharpened. Many swords have no ricasso. On some large weapons, such as the German Zweihänder, a metal cover surrounded the ricasso, and a swordsman might grip it in one hand to wield the weapon more easily in close-quarter combat.
The ricasso normally bears the maker's mark.
The tang is the extension of the blade to which the hilt is fitted.
On Japanese blades, the maker's mark appears on the tang under the grip.
Hilt
The hilt is the collective term for the parts allowing for the handling and control of the blade; these consist of the grip, the pommel, and a simple or elaborate guard, which in post-Viking Age swords could consist of only a crossguard (called a cruciform hilt or quillons). The pommel was originally designed as a stop to prevent the sword slipping from the hand. From around the 11th century onward it became a counterbalance to the blade, allowing a more fluid style of fighting. It can also be used as a blunt instrument at close range, and its weight affects the centre of percussion. In later times a sword knot or tassel was sometimes added. By the 17th century, with the growing use of firearms and the accompanying decline in the use of armour, many rapiers and dueling swords had developed elaborate basket hilts, which protect the palm of the wielder and rendered the gauntlet obsolete. By contrast, Japanese swords of the early modern period customarily used a small disc guard, or tsuba.
In late medieval and Renaissance era European swords, a flap of leather called the chappe or rain guard was attached to a sword's crossguard at the base of the hilt to protect the mouth of the scabbard and prevent water from entering.
Sword scabbards and suspension
Common accessories to the sword include the scabbard and baldric, known as a 'sword belt'.
The scabbard, also known as the sheath, is a protective cover often provided for the sword blade. Scabbards have been made of many materials, including leather, wood, and metals such as brass or steel. The metal fitting where the blade enters the leather or metal scabbard is called the throat, which is often part of a larger scabbard mount, or locket, that bears a carrying ring or stud to facilitate wearing the sword. The blade's point in leather scabbards is usually protected by a metal tip, or chape, which on both leather and metal scabbards is often given further protection from wear by an extension called a drag, or shoe.
A sword belt is a belt with an attachment for the sword's scabbard, used to carry it when not in use. It is usually fixed to the scabbard of the sword, providing a fast means of drawing the sword in battle. Examples of sword belts include the Balteus used by the Roman legionary. Swords and sword belts continue in use for ceremonial occasions by military forces.
Typology
Sword typology is based on morphological criteria on the one hand (blade shape (cross-section, taper, and length), shape and size of the hilt and pommel), and age and place of origin on the other (Bronze Age, Iron Age, European (medieval, early modern, modern), Asian).
The relatively comprehensive Oakeshott typology was created by historian and illustrator Ewart Oakeshott as a way to define and catalogue European swords of the medieval period based on physical form, including blade shape and hilt configuration. The typology also focuses on the smaller, and in some cases contemporary, single-handed swords such as the arming sword.
Single vs. double-edged
As noted above, the terms longsword, broad sword, great sword, and Gaelic claymore are used relative to the era under consideration, and each term designates a particular type of sword.
Jian
In most Asian countries, a sword (jian 劍, geom (검), ken/tsurugi (剣) is a double-edged straight-bladed weapon, while a knife or sabre (dāo 刀, do (도), to/katana (刀) refers to a single-edged object.
Kirpan
Among the Sikhs, the sword is held in very high esteem. A single-edged sword is called a kirpan, and its double-edged counterpart a khanda or tegha.
Churika
The South Indian churika is a handheld double-edged sword traditionally used in the Malabar region of Kerala. It is also worshipped as the weapon of Vettakkorumakan, the hunter god in Hinduism.
Backsword and falchion
European terminology does give generic names for single-edged and double-edged blades but refers to specific types with the term 'sword' covering them all. For example, the backsword may be so called because it is single-edged but the falchion which is also single-edged is given its own specific name.
Single vs. two-handed use
Two-handed
A two-handed sword is any sword that usually requires two hands to wield, or more specifically the very large swords of the 16th century.
Throughout history two-handed swords have generally been less common than their one-handed counterparts, one exception being their common use in Japan. Two-handed grips have two advantages: obviously they allow the strength of two hands to be used, not just one, but by spacing the hands apart they also allow a torque to be applied, rotating the sword in a slashing manner.
A two-handed grip may be needed for one of two reasons: either to wield a particularly large sword or else with the single-sided Japanese tachi for a slashing cut. Slashing swords may have distinctively long hilt grips to facilitate this.
Hand and a half sword
A hand and a half sword, colloquially known as a "bastard sword", was a sword with an extended grip and sometimes pommel so that it could be used with either one or two hands. Although these swords may not provide a full two-hand grip, they allowed its wielders to hold a shield or parrying dagger in their off hand, or to use it as a two-handed sword for a more powerful blow. These should not be confused with a longsword, two-handed sword, or Zweihänder, which were always intended to be used with two hands.
Laws on carrying a sword
The Visigothic Code of Ervig (680-687) made ownership of a sword mandatory for men joining the Visigothic army, regardless of whether the men were Goth or Roman. A number of Charlemagne capitularies made ownership of a sword mandatory, for example, those who owned a warhorse needed to also own a sword.
In fiction
In fantasy, magic swords often appear, based on their use in myth and legend. The science fiction counterpart to these is known as an energy sword (sometimes also referred to as a "beam sword" or "laser sword"), a sword whose blade consists of, or is augmented by, concentrated energy. A well known example of this type of sword is the lightsaber, shown in the Star Wars franchise.

The Sword of Islam (Arabic: سيف الإسلام, romanized: Sayf al-Islām; Italian: Spada dell'Islam) was a ceremonial weapon given on 18 March 1937 to Benito Mussolini, who was pronounced as the Protector of Islam (Arabic: حامي الإسلام, romanized: Hāmī al-Islām; Italian: Protettore dell'Islam). This was part of a fascist campaign to portray Mussolini as a 'protector of Islam'.
History
In 1934, after the creation of Italian Libya and the Libyan genocide, Mussolini adopted a policy for encouraging comparisons with Islam, calling the local population "Italian Muslims of the fourth shore of Italy", building mosques and Quranic schools, preparing service facilities for the pilgrims going to Mecca and even making a High School of Islamic Culture in Tripoli. Behind the apparent humanitarian intent, the Fascists and some sectors of the Islamic world were recognizing that Mussolini's policy targeted the common enemies of Fascist Italy and Islam, France and the United Kingdom. These common interests were generated from the aversion to the agreements of the Treaty of Versailles of 1919, dominated by France, the United Kingdom and the United States which had neither fully satisfied the requests brought forth by Italy, nor the requests from this part of the Islamic world.
In order to earn the favour of the Arabs and to seal himself the alliance, Mussolini, although a signatory of the Lateran Treaty with the Holy See, decided to have bestowed on him the title of Protector of Islam. According to the interpretation of Mussolini, with the Italian government taking over the place of the Ottomans in Libya, such a title was up to him concerning law since, in some manner, he was heir of the authority of the caliph. The visit to Libya was officially to celebrate its three year rule by Italo Balbo, as well as opening the Litoranea highway. On 18 March 1937, in the outskirts of Tripoli, Mussolini received the Sword of Islam from Iusuf Kerisc, a leading Berber supporter of the Italian occupation against the Libyan resistance, during a lavish ceremony. After entering Tripoli among salutes of cannons and at the head of a rank of 2,600 cavalrymen, Mussolini reaffirmed his closeness to the Muslim population of Libya and Ethiopia, guaranteeing "peace, justice, wellness and respect for the laws of the Prophet". He also visited a mosque in Derna.
The following year, a horse monument was inaugurated in the main square of the Libyan capital in honour of Mussolini. Its base read: "To Benito Mussolini, peacemaker of the people, redeemer of the land of Libya, the mindful population and exhibitions where the Sword of Islam flashed consecrate in the sign of the Lictor a loyalty that challenges the destiny."
The sword, decorated in arabesque, equipped with a double-edged straight blade and with a hilt and solid gold friezes, had been achieved from the art firm Picchiani e Barlacchi di Firenze on the order of Mussolini himself. After 1937, it was no longer used and was guarded in a small glass reliquary at Rocca delle Caminate, summer residence of Mussolini. There were no more signs of the precious object after 25 July 1943, when Rocca delle Caminate was ravaged and plundered by the Italian resistance.
Reactions
In spite of the approval from the media of the regime, the ceremony provoked hilarity among the Italian people because of its absurd and paradoxical connotations. One of the photographs of the event, depicting Mussolini on the saddle of a horse held by the halter by a groom, in his official version was retouched and published deleting the groom, in order to make it appear that Mussolini was able to ride his own mount without anyone's help. The detail is often cited as one of the more typical examples of the art of falsification established in the totalitarian regime.
The 'protector of Islam' message was not positively received in the Arab world. As one Cairo newspaper put it: "Protector of Islam indeed ... we have heard that before. Napoleon said it here, and so did the Kaiser at Damascus. It’s a bad precedent." The rector of Al-Azhar University asserted that only a Muslim could call himself a protector of Islam. After the Italian invasion of Muslim Albania caused another wave of anti-Italian denouncements in the Arab world, Mussolini himself complained to Goring; "Since Italy’s Albanian venture the Arabs were certainly rather doubtful as to his role of Protector, which he had assumed symbolically with the Sword of Islam." Hitler also complained about Mussolini in the “Political Testament of Adolf Hitler” but this originates from a likely forgery by Francois Genoud.

A sword of justice is a ceremonial sword that is used to signify a monarch's supreme judicial power. In some cases, this may have been an executioner's sword that was no longer used for executions, becoming instead a ceremonial one.
The Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom include two swords of justice: the sharply pointed Sword of Temporal Justice and the obliquely pointed Sword of Spiritual Justice, whose characteristics are said to indicate that only temporal courts have power over death. The current two swords, together with Curtana, the Sword of Mercy, were made for coronation of Charles I of England, which took place in 1626.

A sword of state is a sword, used as part of the regalia, symbolising the authority and power of a monarch, other high official or, sometimes, an institution. It is sometimes borne in front of the monarch or official.
It is known to be used in following monarchies:
Reichsschwert of the Holy Roman Empire, see Imperial Sword
Joyeuse, used for the sacre of the king of France. Reputed to be the sword of Charlemagne.
Kingdom of Hungary
Kingdom of Bohemia (Czech Republic) – Sword of Saint Wenceslas
Kingdom of England, later Great Britain, then United Kingdom; see British crown jewels#Swords
Kingdom of Scotland, see Honours of Scotland
The former Kingdom of the Isle of Man (now a British Crown dependency), bearing the triskelion symbol, annually used on Tynwald Day
Kingdom of the Netherlands, see Dutch Royal Regalia (made in 1840 for enthronements)
Kingdom of Denmark, see Danish crown regalia
Kingdom of Norway, see Regalia of Norway
Kingdom of Sweden, see Swedish Royal Regalia, where it is the oldest of the Vasa regalia
Kingdom of Poland – Szczerbiec and two Grunwald Swords
Kingdom of Mysore – Chikka Devaraja Wodeyar, ending with the Krishnaraja Wodeyar II
Empire of Russia, see Regalia of the Russian tsars
The Kingdom of Georgia
The Sword of Osman, given to Sultans of the Ottoman Empire
In the former sultanate of the Maldives, being invested on the Monarch in a traditional gong ceremony
Kingdom of Thailand or Siam- the Sword of Victory, one of the five Regalia of Thailand.
Shangfang Baojian (simplified Chinese: 尚方宝剑; traditional Chinese: 尚方寶劍) of Chinese dynasties from Han dynasty to Qing dynasty
The Eodo of Taejo of Joseon Dynasty, Korea
Kusanagi, kept by the Emperor of Japan
Also in the Malay world, notably in
the sultanate of Perak, where it gave the name to a 'national' order of knighthood
Sarawak (on Borneo)
Swords of state are also used in some republics, as in the Senate of the state of South Carolina in the United States of America.

The usage of swords in courts-martial was an established tradition within the British armed forces. The accused was marched into their court-martial by an escort armed with a sword. Commissioned officers would be obliged to put their swords on the court table as a symbol of their rank and reputation being put on hold. At the conclusion of the hearing, the tip of the sword was turned towards them if they had been found guilty. The practice was abolished in 2004 following a claim that it was demeaning under the Human Rights Act 1998.
Practice
Traditionally in British courts-martial, all court officials would wear swords as well as all officers, whether they were a witness or were acting for the defence or prosecution. All accused, regardless of rank, would be marched into the courtroom by an armed escort. Officers' escorts would carry a drawn sword. If the accused was not an officer, the escort would carry a drawn cutlass. The accused officer would then have to lay his sword lengthwise on the court table as a symbol of putting his officer's commission and reputation on hold and on the line. When the verdict was decided, the judge would move the sword. If the tip of the sword pointed towards the accused, it meant they had been found guilty. If the sword was either unmoved or the hilt of the sword was pointing towards the accused then he had been found not guilty.
Abolition in the UK
In 2000, two weeks after the Human Rights Act 1998 came into force, a court martial was challenged that all swords should be removed from court as it was claimed to be "degrading". The Judge Advocate at the trial agreed for all present to remove their swords but did so under common law practice, describing them as an "unnecessary encumbrance". The European Court of Human Rights case of Grieves v United Kingdom, which concerned the independence of members of courts martial, referred to the use of swords but this was not part of the issues for determination by the court. In 2004 Her Majesty's Government declared that it would no longer require the accused to be marched in with an armed escort nor would any members present wear sheathed swords. This came after Grieves' solicitor had written to the Secretary of State for Defence comparing the procedure to a "Gilbert and Sullivan opera" and threatened to go back to the European Court for a ruling on swords for being intimidating.
The Royal Australian Navy retains the practice of the sword on the table at courts-martial, as does the Indian Army.

Sykes Smelt Mill was a mediaeval mill located between Sykes and Hareden in Bowland Forest High, Lancashire, England. It stood on the banks of Langden Brook.
A "Smelt Mill Clough", but not the mill itself, appears on the 1841 tithe map for the Upper Division of the Trough of Bowland. The site is now believed to be occupied by a group of small buildings, known as "Smelt Mill Cottages", one of which is the home of Bowland Pennine Mountain Rescue Team. One of the buildings sits on an old foundation.
There is some evidence that smelting was being done in the early 17th century, during which period Bevis Bulmer was working at the King's Silver Mines on Brunghill Moor, near Newton-in-Bowland. It is possible that Bulmer also worked at Sykes mill (or nearby Ashnott) under a "blanket lease" held by the Society of Mines Royal. It is not known whether Bulmer had a smelt mill on his mines, but in 1630 Charles Coare, from Bashall Eaves, was the smelter at Thievley Mine.

The Tecla house is a prototype 3D-printed eco residential building made out of clay. The first model was designed by the Italian architecture studio Mario Cucinella Architects (MCA) and engineered and built by Italian 3D printing specialists WASP by April 2021, becoming the world's first house 3D-printed entirely from a mixture made from mainly local earth and water. Its name is a portmanteau of "technology" and "clay" and that of one of Italo Calvino's Invisible Cities whose construction never ceases.
History
The project was reportedly first conceived by WASP Founder Massimo Moretti and, via research of the Cucinella-founded training center School of Sustainability (SOS), MCA's founder Mario Cucinella. For construction, WASP's 3D printing technology Crane WASP was used. This 3D printer was used for the similar building "GAIA" – the first 3D printed earth building – completed in 2018, about 7 years after WASP's inception in 2012. Printing started in September 2019. It was developed as a solution that addresses urgent problems, like the climate crisis, via application of both ancient materials and techniques, and novel technologies.
Technology and construction
For the building WASP's 3D printing technology Crane WASP was used. It is the first 3D printer that can print from raw earth and is modular and multilevel. It consists of software and (in 2021) a stationary fixture with two synchronized printer arms that can simultaneously print an area of 50 m2 each.
The material consists of local soil mixed with water, fibers from rice husks and a binder. The infilling material for thermal insulation consists of rice husk and rice straw from rice cultivation waste. The composition of the mixture and filling of the walls can be optimized depending on local climate. An early phase of the construction is the digging and mixing phase in which a digger digs up local soil which is then analyzed and mixed with water and additives.
The house is made up of two modules up to 4.2 m in height, has an area of about 60 m³ and can be built with 200 hours of printing. It uses 7000 G-code machine codes, 350 12 mm layers and 150 km of extrusion from the printer arms, for an average consumption of less than 6 kW (total printing output of ~1200 kWh). As with any 3D printed product, the design can be modified for improvements and flexible adaptation to different purposes and environments.
The buildings are dome-shaped, have a large glass door and are topped with ceiling-windows. As of 2021, the only prototype has no windows and paint on its walls.
It was built with collaboration from a number of Italian companies and Massa Lombarda as an institutional partner.
Uses and problems
The use of local natural materials reduces waste and greenhouse gas emissions.
Data and projections indicate an increasing relevance of buildings that are both low-cost and sustainable, notably that, according to a 2020 UN report, building and construction are responsible for ~38% of all energy-related carbon dioxide emissions, that, partly due to global warming, migration crises are expected to intensify in the future and that the UN estimates that by 2030, ~3 billion people or ~40% of the world's population will require access to accessible, affordable housing.
Buildings like the Tecla prototype could be very cheap, well-insulated, stable and weatherproof, climate-adaptable, customizable, get produced rapidly, require only very little easily learnable manual labor, mitigate carbon emissions from concrete, require less energy, reduce homelessness, help enable intentional communities such as autonomous eco-communities, and enable the provision of housing for victims of natural disasters as well as – via knowledge- and technology-transfer to local people – for emigrants to Europe near their homes, rather than controversially in distant countries.
The prototype is undergoing structural and thermal performance testing.
The machines needed for construction take as much space as the container for shipping and are not mass-produced and inexpensive enough for common individual citizens to afford. Disadvantages of printing with clay-mixtures include height-limitations or horizontal space requirements, latencies due to having to let the mixture dry with current processes, and other problems related to the novelty of the product such as their connection to plumbing systems. While they are unlikely to be relevant for solutions to overpopulation crises such as in China, their early implementations may tend to enable societal innovation through autark communities and displacement- and migration-relief via use by citizens of African and Middle Eastern countries.

A tent is a shelter consisting of sheets of fabric or other material draped over or attached to a frame of poles or a supporting rope. While smaller tents may be free-standing or attached to the ground, large tents are usually anchored using guy ropes tied to stakes or tent pegs. First used as portable homes by nomads, tents are now more often used for recreational camping and as temporary shelters.
Tents range in size from "bivouac" structures, just big enough for one person to sleep in, up to huge circus tents capable of seating thousands of people. Tents for recreational camping fall into two categories. Tents intended to be carried by backpackers are the smallest and lightest type. Small tents may be sufficiently light that they can be carried for long distances on a touring bicycle, a boat, or when backpacking. The second type are larger, heavier tents which are usually carried in a car or other vehicle. Depending on tent size and the experience of the person or people involved, such tents can usually be assembled (pitched) in between 5 and 25 minutes; disassembly (striking) takes a similar length of time. Some very specialised tents have spring-loaded poles and can be pitched in seconds, but take somewhat longer to strike (take down and pack).
Over the past decade, tents have also been increasingly linked with homelessness crises in the United States, Canada, and other regions. Places of multiple homeless people living in tents closely pitched or plotted near each other are often referred to as tent cities.
History
A form of tent called a teepee or tipi, noted for its cone shape and peak smoke hole, was used by Native American tribes and Aboriginal Canadians of the Plains Indians since ancient times, variously estimated from 10,000 to 4,000 years BC.
Tents were used at least as far back as the early Iron Age. They are mentioned in the Bible; for example, in Genesis 4:20 Jabal is described as "the first to live in tents and raise sheep and goats". The Roman Army used leather tents, copies of which have been used successfully by modern re-enactors. Various styles developed over time, some derived from traditional nomadic tents, such as the yurt.
Most military tents throughout history were of a simple ridge design. The major technological advance was the use of linen or hemp canvas for the canopy versus leather for the Romans. The primary use of tents was still to provide portable shelter for a small number of men in the field.
By World War I larger designs were being deployed in rear areas to provide shelter for support activities and supplies.
Four types of tents which can be characterized by their unique shapes are A-Frame tents, Pyramid tents, Hoop tents, and Dome tents. Tents tend not to be very spacious, given their ground surface area.
Use
Tents are used as habitation by nomads, recreational campers, soldiers, and disaster victims. Pole marquees, a type of large tent are typically used as overhead shelter for festivals, weddings, backyard parties, corporate events, excavation (construction) covers, and industrial shelters.
Traditional
Tents have traditionally been used by nomadic people all over the world, such as Native Americans, Mongolian, Turkic and Tibetan Nomads, and the Bedouin.
Military
Armies all over the world have long used tents as part of their working life. Tents are preferred by the military for their relatively quick setup and take down times, compared to more traditional shelters. One of the world's largest users of tents is the U.S. Department of Defense. The U.S. DoD has strict rules on tent quality and tent specifications. The most common tent uses for the military are temporary sleeping quarters (barracks); dining facilities (DFACs); field headquarters; morale, welfare, and recreation (MWR) facilities; and security checkpoints. One of the most popular military designs currently fielded is the TEMPER Tent, an acronym for Tent Expandable Modular PERsonnel. The United States Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the deployable rapid assembly shelter or DRASH, a collapsible tent with provisions for air conditioning and heating.
Recreational
Camping is a popular form of recreation which often involves the use of tents. A tent is economical and practical because of its portability and low environmental impact. These qualities are necessary when used in the wilderness or backcountry.
Emergency
Tents are often used in humanitarian emergencies, such as war, earthquakes and fire. The primary choice of tents in humanitarian emergencies are canvas tents, because a cotton canvas tent allows functional breathability while serving the purpose of temporary shelter. Tents distributed by organisations such as UNHCR are made by various manufacturers, depending on the region where the tents are deployed, as well as depending on the purpose.
At times, however, these temporary shelters become a permanent or semi-permanent home, especially for displaced people living in refugee camps or shanty towns who can not return to their former home and for whom no replacement homes are made available.
Homelessness
Tents have been increasingly used as shelter for homeless people in the U.S., especially California, Oregon, and Washington. Encampments spiked in the mid-to-late 2010s. These tent cities housing many homeless and travelers/vagabonds are also commonly found in major cities in the South, including Austin, Texas, which had passed a restriction on homeless encampments in May 2021.
Protest movements
Tents are also often used as sites and symbols of protest over time. In 1968 Resurrection City saw hundreds of tents set up by anti-poverty campaigners in Washington D.C. In the 1970s and 1980s anti-nuclear peace camps spread across Europe and North America, with the largest women's-only camp to date set up outside the RAF Greenham Common United States airbase in Newbury, England to protest the deployment there of cruise missiles during the Cold War. The 1990s saw environmental protest camps as part of the campaign for the Clayoquot Sound in Canada and the roads protests in the UK. The first No Border Network camp was held in Strasbourg in 2002, becoming the first in a series of international camps that continue to be organised today. Other international camps of the 2000s include summit counter-mobilisations like Horizone at the Gleneagles G8 gathering in 2005 and the start of Camp for Climate Action in 2006. Since September 2011, the tent has been used as a symbol of the Occupy movement, an international protest movement which is primarily directed against economic and social inequality. Occupy protesters use tents to create camps in public places wherein they can form communities of open discussion and democratic action.
General considerations
Generally, the interior of an enclosed tent is about 10 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than the outside environment (not accounting for wind chill), due to the retention of body heat and (to a lesser extent) radiation.
Tent fabric may be made of many materials including cotton (canvas), nylon, felt and polyester. Cotton absorbs water, so it can become very heavy when wet, but the associated swelling tends to block any minute holes so that wet cotton is more waterproof than dry cotton. Cotton tents were often treated with paraffin to enhance water resistance. Nylon and polyester are much lighter than cotton and do not absorb much water; with suitable coatings they can be very waterproof, but they tend to deteriorate over time due to a slow chemical breakdown caused by ultraviolet light. The most common treatments to make fabric waterproof are silicone impregnation or polyurethane coating. Since stitching makes tiny holes in a fabric seams are often sealed or taped to block these holes and maintain waterproofness, though in practice a carefully sewn seam can be waterproof.
Rain resistance is measured and expressed as hydrostatic head in millimetres (mm). This indicates the pressure of water needed to penetrate a fabric. Heavy or wind-driven rain has a higher pressure than light rain. Standing on a groundsheet increases the pressure on any water underneath. Fabric with a hydrostatic head rating of 1000 mm or less is best regarded as shower resistant, with 1500 mm being usually suitable for summer camping. Tents for year-round use generally have at least 2000 mm; expedition tents intended for extreme conditions are often rated at 3000 mm. Where quoted, groundsheets may be rated for 5000 mm or more.
Many tent manufacturers indicate capacity by such phrases as "3 berth" or "2 person". These numbers indicate how many people the manufacturer thinks can use the tent, though these numbers do not always allow for any personal belongings, such as luggage, inflatable mattresses, camp beds, cots, etc., nor do they always allow for people who are of above average height. Checking the quoted sizes of sleeping areas reveals that several manufacturers consider that a width of 150 cm (4.9 ft) is enough for three people; snug is the operative word. Experience indicates that camping may be more comfortable if the actual number of occupants is one or even two less than the manufacturer's suggestion, though different manufacturers have different standards for space requirement and there is no accepted standard.
Tent used in areas with biting insects often have their vent and door openings covered with fine-mesh netting.
Tents can be improvised using waterproof fabric, string, and sticks.
List of traditional types
Bell tent, a conical tent design originating around 600AD.
Berliner, an emergency Alpine bivouac
Chum, a Siberian conical tent similar to North American tipi and the Nordic goahte and lavvu
Fly
Gazebo, a soft shelter with a roof but typically without walls
Geteld, a conical tent used by the Anglo-Saxon in the 9th-13th centuries
Gotthard, a Swiss tent used at high altitudes
Goahti and Lavvu, two related kinds of Sámi tents using a conical design
Kohte, an early 20th century German Scout conical tent design based on the tents of the Sámi people
Loue
Pandal
Ridge tent or wall tent, blanket terms for the inverted V-frame design dating from prehistory to the present day
Sarrasani, a large gathering tent reminiscent of the Sarrasani
Sibley, a conical tent patented in 1856 and used by the US military before and during the American Civil War.
Tarp tent
Tipi, a conical design used by some indigenous peoples of North America
Tupiq, a conical design used by the Inuit
Wigwam and wikiup, an often bowed conical and dome tent of North America
Whymper, a ridge tent used for mountaineering
Yurt, a larger cousin of conical designs, with vertical walls and smaller pitch
Parts
There are three basic configurations of tents, each of which may appear with many variations:
Single skin (USA: single wall): Only one waterproof layer of fabric is used, comprising at least roof and walls. To minimize condensation on the inside of the tent, some expedition tents use waterproof/breathable fabrics.
Single skin with flysheet: A waterproof flysheet or rain fly is suspended over and clear of the roof of the tent; it often overlaps the tent roof slightly, but does not extend down the sides or ends of the tent.
Double skin (USA: double wall): The outer tent is a waterproof layer which extends down to the ground all round. One or more 'inner tents' provide sleeping areas. The outer tent may be just a little larger than the inner tent, or it may be a lot larger and provide a covered living area separate from the sleeping area(s). An inner tent is not waterproof, but allows water vapour to pass through so that condensation occurs only on the exterior side. The double layer may also provide some thermal insulation. Either the outer skin or the inner skin may be the structural component, carrying the poles; the structural skin is always pitched first, though some tents are built with the outer and inner linked so that they are both pitched at the same time.
Components:
A flysheet or rain fly (found only in double skin tents) is used to protect the actual tent from water. A flysheet is waterproof on the outside and also provides a surface to collect condensation on the inside, which then runs down to the ground. When a flysheet is used, it is important that there be no contact with the inner tent it is protecting; this keeps the inner dry. 'Expedition' tents often have extra poles to help ensure that wind does not blow the two layers into contact.
The inner tent comprises the main living and sleeping area of the tent. For double skin tents, the inner tent (often mesh) is not waterproof since it is protected by the rain fly. For single skin tents, the inner tent is often made of waterproof-breathable material that prevents liquid water from penetrating the inside of the tent, but still allows water vapour to be transported out.
The vestibule (they can be plural) is a floorless covered section located outside a tent entrance that is typically used for the storage of boots, packs, and other small equipment. Vestibules are often used for activities that are preferably not performed within the tent itself, such as cooking or equipment cleaning. Vestibules may be included as a removable attachment or integrated into the tent itself. Vestibule size varies considerably, ranging from extended areas with more surface than the inner tent down to practically nothing.
A groundsheet is used to provide a waterproof barrier between the ground and a sleeping bag. With double skin tents, the inner tents normally have a sewn-in groundsheet, but a separate flat groundsheet may be provided for any living area. With single skin tents, the groundsheet may be sewn in or separate. Normal practice with sewn-in groundsheets is for the groundsheet to extend some 15 cm (5.9 in) up the lower part of the walls (sometimes called a 'bathtub' arrangement); this copes with a situation where water seeps under the side walls of the tent. Separate groundsheets allow load-sharing when backpacking, and may make it easier to pitch and strike a tent, but they provide less protection against insects etc. getting into the sleeping area; also, if any part of a separate groundsheet protrudes from under the side walls, then it provides a ready path for moisture to flow into the tent.
The poles provide structural support. They may be collapsible for easier transport and storage. Some designs use rigid poles, typically made of metal, or sometimes wood. Other designs use semi-rigid poles, typically made of fiberglass, or sometimes of special metal alloys. Another pole type uses inflatable beams as the structural support. Some tents, particularly very lightweight models, actually use hiking poles as their structural supports.
Stakes (or tent pegs) or screws may be used to fasten the tent to the ground. Some are attached to guy ropes that pull outward on the poles and/or fabric to help shape the tent or give it additional stability. Others are used to anchor the bottom edge of the fabric to the ground. Pegs may be made of wood, plastic, or metal. A mallet may be needed to drive thicker pegs into the ground. Skewer metal pegs consisting essentially of a length of thick wire with a hook on one end can usually be inserted by hand, except if the ground is very hard, but may not be as strong as more substantial pegs. Pegs used for guy ropes should not be driven vertically into the ground; instead for maximum strength they should be driven in at an angle so that the peg is at right angles to the guy rope attached to it. Lighter free standing tents may need some guy ropes and pegs to prevent them from being blown away.
Air vents help reduce the effects of condensation. When people breathe, they expel water vapour. If the outside of the tent is colder than the inside (the usual case), then this vapour will condense on the inside of the tent, on any clothing lying about, on the outside of a sleeping bag, etc. Hence ventilation helps to remove the vapour, although this may let in cold air.
An optional tent footprint or groundsheet protector may be used. This is a separate flat groundsheet (tarp) which goes underneath the main groundsheet, and is slightly smaller than that groundsheet. The intention is to protect the main groundsheet, especially when camping on rough terrain, since it is much cheaper to replace a separate footprint groundsheet than it is to replace a sewn-in groundsheet.
Design factors
Many factors affect tent design, including:
Financial cost
The least expensive tents tend to be heavier, less durable and less waterproof. The most expensive tents, used by serious backpackers and professional adventurers, are usually lighter in weight, more durable and more waterproof.
Intended use
Backpacking, lengthy duration for carrying the tent. Weight and size are the most crucial factors.
Touring, high frequency of pitching and striking the tent. Ease of pitching/striking the tent is important.
Static, staying at one campsite for a week or two at a time. A comfortable camping experience is the target.
Camping season
A tent required only for summer use may be very different from one to be used in the depths of winter. Manufacturers label tents as one-season, two/three-season, three/four season, four season, etc. A one-season tent is generally for summer use only, and may only be capable of coping with light showers. A three-season tent is for spring/summer/autumn and should be capable of withstanding fairly heavy rain, or very light snow. A four-season tent should be suitable for winter camping in all but the most extreme conditions; an expedition tent (for mountain conditions) should be strong enough to cope with heavy snow, strong winds, as well as heavy rain. Some tents are sold, quite cheaply, as festival tents; these may be suitable only for camping in dry weather, and may not even be showerproof.
Size of tent
The number and age of people who will be camping determines how big and what features the sleeping area(s) must have.
To allow for inclement weather, some covered living space separate from the sleeping area(s) may be desirable. Alternatively, cyclists on a camping trip may wish for enough covered space to keep their bicycles out of the weather.
To allow for sunshine, an awning to provide shade may not go amiss. Some tents have additional poles so that the fabric doorways can be used as awnings.
Internal height. Manufacturers quote the maximum internal height, but the usable internal height may be a little lower, depending on the tent style. Ridge tents have a steeply sloping roof so the whole height is rarely usable. Dome tents slope gently in all directions from the peak enabling nearly the entire height to be usable for a large portion of the tent. Tunnel tents have a good usable height along the center line. Frame and cabin tents have gently sloping roofs and near vertical walls. To fully evaluate the usable space in a tent, both the maximum wall height and slope must be considered. There are four useful heights used to evaluate appropriate tent height: lie down only, sit, kneel, stand. The exact heights at which these apply depend on the heights of the campers involved; those over 182 cm (5.97 ft) are likely to have less choice of tents than those who are somewhat shorter. As a starting point, sitting height is often between 90 and 105 cm (2 ft 11 in and 3 ft 5 in), and kneeling height may be between 120 and 150 cm (3.9 and 4.9 ft). These different heights are useful for evaluating whether certain tasks, such as changing clothes, can be accomplished in the tent.
Number of sleeping areas
Larger tents sometimes are partitioned into separate sleeping areas or rooms. A tent described as viz-a-viz (cabin tent) usually has two separate sleeping areas with a living area in between.
Tent color
In some areas there is a move toward reducing the visual impact of campsites. The best colors for low visibility are green, brown, tan or khaki.
An opposing consideration is of safety and calls for visible unnatural colors, such as bright yellow-orange or red. Bright-colored tents can be easily spotted from the air in cases of an emergency. They are important in places where vehicles may not notice a low-visibility tent and run over its unsuspecting occupiers. Campers wandering away from camp will find their way back more easily if their tent is highly visible. Additionally, lost hikers may find rescue by spotting a visible camp site from afar. Some people have a personal preference for various colors and some manufacturers see the colors as part of their product branding.
Setup effort
Some styles of camping and living outdoors entails quick setup of tents. As a general rule, the more robust the tent, the more time and effort needed to set up and dismantle, though specific design attention on quick setup (possibly in exchange for cost and/or weight) can alter that (for example, the Swedish manufacturer Hilleberg specify a design goal that their toughest tents should be easily pitched by a single camper in inclement weather while wearing mittens, but the implementation of that adds to their price). The style of the tent also has a great impact on its ease of use.
Weather conditions
A tent can be more or less able to cope with cold weather or rainy conditions. The amount of water resistance is sometimes measured in the unit millimeters, water gauge. Tents can be defined by the number of season that they can be used. There are two-season, three-season and four-season tents. Two-season tents are ideal for warm/hot temperatures but do not cope well with rainy and windy conditions. Three-season tents can handle most weather conditions including rain and wind but will struggle in heavy snow. Four-season tents can withstand any weather conditions. Design and material vary depending on the number of seasons the tent can withstand.
Shelters
Shelters are not normally used for sleeping. Instead they may act as a store or provide shelter from sun, rain, or dew.
A fly (or flysheet) consists of a single rectangular sheet of material. Two opposite sides are held up in the middle by poles, or sometimes just a rope between conveniently placed trees. The tops of the poles are attached via guy ropes to pegs, in order to keep the poles upright. Additional guy ropes are attached to the lower edges to pull them outwards away from the poles.
A gazebo uses a framework of metal poles to support a roof. This structure provides a lot more usable space than does a flysheet, since the gently sloping roof allows for a reasonable amount of headroom even at the edges (like a frame tent). Because a gazebo is free-standing, it is often used as a shelter for a temporary shop at a fair or street market.
A beach tent is often a simplified form of dome tent and provide a useful (relatively sand-free) place to temporarily store beach equipment, but is at most showerproof. Some beach tents use specially treated fabric which is opaque to ultra-violet light, and so provide some protection against sunburn. Maximum height is typically about 120 cm (3.9 ft), and they are usually not large enough for an adult to lie down in.
A fishermen's tent is also a modified dome tent, often with a projecting awning high enough to sit under, but sometimes with no closable doorway.
Modern styles
With modern materials, tent manufacturers have great freedom to vary types and styles and shapes of tents.
The poles effectively hold the tent in the required shape.
Poles which dismantle for ease of transport are either colour-coded or linked by chain or cord, so there is little doubt as to which poles connect where.
Relatively few guy ropes are needed (sometimes none).
The exact positioning of any guy ropes is not too critical.
Rigid poles
Many tents which use rigid steel poles are free-standing and do not require guy ropes, though they may require pegs around the bottom edge of the fabric. These tents are usually so heavy (25 to 80 kg) that it takes a rather strong wind to blow them away.
Frame tents are double-skin tents. They have a living area and one or more cotton/nylon/polyester inner tents. The outer tent is draped over a free-standing steel frame, and may be made of canvas or polyester (the latter often has a hydrostatic head of 3000 mm, i.e. three season camping). The living area is generally at least as large as the sleeping area, and there may be a specific section with a window and extra air vents for use as a kitchen. The walls are nearly vertical and are typically about 150 to 180 cm (4.9 to 5.9 ft) high. The center of the gently sloping roof is often 210 cm (6.9 ft) high or more and provides reasonable headroom throughout. The smaller two-person models were less than 3 metres square (10 ft), but these have largely been replaced by dome or tunnel tents. The larger eight-person models may exceed 5 metres (16 feet) in length and/or width.
Cabin tents are single-skin tents used mainly in the USA. They often have nylon walls, polyester roof, and a polyethylene floor, plus an awning at one or both ends. With a hydrostatic head of only 1000 mm, they may best be considered as summer tents. Removable internal dividers allow the cabin to be split into 'rooms'. Sizes may range from 13 ft by 8 ft (two rooms) up to 25 ft by 10 ft (four rooms), with wall and roof heights similar to those of frame tents. There are three separate pole units, with each unit consisting of two uprights and a connecting ridge. These pole units support the centre and ends of the roof, and are usually outside the tent.
Pop Up tents, sometimes appearing hyphenated as pop-up tents, are very easy to use and to carry. Perfect for professional campers who want to spend the smallest time in pitching the tent.
Wall tents are the largest and most accommodating canvas tents available. They are popular with hunters and backcountry campers. Wall tents provide much room space, as well as more than enough head space which allows people to move about freely inside the tent without crouching or bending over. This type of set up is great for those who spend much time in their tents, as well as for those who need extra space for cots, tables, stoves, etc. Also known as outfitter tents.
Spike tents are smaller and lighter than wall tents and so they are easier to pack and lighter to haul, they are a good choice if weight is the main concern and if there are not many people sleeping in one tent. Spike tent frames vary in size and style but are almost always lighter than wall tent frames. Also known as wigwam tents.
Range tents are similar to spike tents in their shape and size, except range tents usually do not have side walls at all. They resemble a pyramid type shape and are often referred to as pyramid tents. Range tents can either be set up with a bi-pole system that goes on the outside of the tent, or they can be set up using a single frame pole which goes in the middle of the tent on the inside, and they can also be set up by tying the top of the tent to a hanging tree branch. Also known as teepee tents.
Flexible poles
Flexible poles used for tents in this section are typically between 3 and 6 metres (9.8 and 19.7 ft) long. Cheap poles are made of tubes of fibreglass with an external diameter less than 1 cm (1⁄3 in), whereas more expensive aluminium alloys are the material of choice for added strength and durability. For ease of transportation, these poles are made in sections some 30 to 60 cm (0.98 to 1.97 ft) long, with one end of each section having a socket into which the next section can fit. For ease of assembly, the sections for each pole are often connected by an internal elastic cord running the entire length of the pole.
Dome tents have a very simple structure and are available in a wide variety of sizes ranging from lightweight two-person tents with limited headroom up to six or nine-person tents with headroom exceeding 180 cm (5.9 ft). These may be single wall, or single-wall with partial flysheet, or double wall. Depending on the pole arrangement, some models pitch outer-tent first, while others pitch inner-tent first. The former helps keep the inner tent dry, but the latter is easier to pitch.
The basic dome has a rectangular floor and two poles which cross at the peak; each pole runs in a smooth curve from one bottom corner, up to the peak, and then down to the diagonally opposite bottom corner. There are usually special fittings at each corner which fit into sockets at the ends of each pole – pole tension keeps everything in shape. The poles can run on either the inside or outside of the tent fabric. When located on the interior, poles are held in place by a variety of means including hook and loop style straps, clips, and other fastening hardware. Poles that are located on the outside of the tent fabric are attached via fabric pole sleeves or plastic clips. Dome tents do not require guy ropes and pegs for structural integrity as they are considered free-standing, but must be pegged down in high winds.
The basic dome design has been modified extensively, producing tents with three poles, tents with irregularly-shaped bases, and other unusual types. A common variation is to add a third pole between two adjacent corners; this is angled away from the tent and supports an extension of the flysheet, to give a porch/storage area.
Tunnel tents may offer more usable internal space than a dome tent with the same ground area, but almost always need guy ropes and pegs to stay upright. These are almost always double wall tents. Sizes range from one-person tents with very limited headroom up to eight or ten-person tents with headroom exceeding 180 cm (5.9 ft).
A basic tunnel tent uses two or more flexible poles, arranged as parallel hoops, with tent fabric attached to form a half-cylinder or tapering tunnel. The most common designs have a sleeping area at one end and a vestibule area at the other, though vestibules (possibly extended) at each end are not uncommon, or vis-à-vis sleeping at either end and a central opening to a common vestibule area are made too.
Hybrid dome/tunnel tents are now common. One variation is to use a basic dome as the sleeping area; one or two hooped poles to one side are linked by a tunnel to the dome to provide a porch. Another variation is to use a large dome as the living area, with up to four tunnel extensions to provide sleeping areas.
Geodesic tents are essentially dome tents with two or more extra poles which criss-cross the normal two poles to help support the basic shape and minimise the amount of unsupported fabric. This makes them more suitable for use in snowy conditions and in strong winds. To help withstand strong winds they are rarely more than 120 or 150 cm (3.9 or 4.9 ft) high.
Single-hoop tents use just one flexible pole and are often sold as light-weight one or two-person tents. These are the modern equivalent of older style pup tents, and have the same feature of somewhat limited headroom. Different styles may have the pole going either along or across the tent.
The pop-up tent is a recent innovation. This type of tent is equipped with built-in very flexible hoops so that when the tent is unpacked, it springs into shape immediately, and so is extremely easy to set up. Such tents are usually single-skinned and are generally aimed at the one-season or children's end of the market; their high flexibility makes them unsuitable for use in windy situations. After use the tent is packed down into a thick disc shape.
Inflatable airbeams
Inflatable pole supports, also known as airbeams, serve as rigid structural supports when inflated but are soft and pliable when deflated. Tents using such technology are neither commonly used nor widely accepted and are available from a very limited number of suppliers.
Much like a bicycle tube and tire, airbeams are often composed of a highly dimensionally stable (i.e. no stretch) fabric sleeve and an air-holding inner bladder. However, other airbeam constructions consist of coated fabrics that are cut and manufactured to its intended shape by a method such as thermal welding. Depending on the desired tent size, airbeams can be anywhere from 2-40 inches in diameter, inflated to different pressures. High pressure airbeams (40-80 psi) that are filled by compressors are most often used in larger shelters, whereas low pressure beams (5-7 psi) are preferred for recreational use. The relatively low pressure enables the use of a manual pump to inflate the airbeam to the desired level. Airbeams have the unique quality of bending, rather than breaking, when overloaded. Tents that use inflatable airbeams are structured almost identically to those that use flexible poles.
Dome tents that use inflatable airbeam support are available in a variety of sizes ranging from lightweight 2-person to larger 6+ person shelters, and are virtually identical to the arrangement of flexible-pole supported dome tents. Beams are usually integrated into the tent shell such that they do not have to be reinserted every time setup occurs. Airbeams can be located on either the inside or outside of the tent shell. Similar to the pole-supported construction, airbeam supported dome tents are free standing but should be staked out with pegs and guyout lines to increase stability and strength.
Tunnel tents are a common form of airbeam supported tents because their size can be easily modified by adding additional hoops. Military applications use this style of tent for a range of purposes including medical shelters, helicopter enclosures, and airplane hangars. In these constructions, hoops are generally identical in size. In commercial airbeam supported tents, the hoops can be different sizes. Tunnel tents tend to withstand high winds well because of their low profile shape. However, the tents are not freestanding and must be anchored and guyed out securely.
Older tent styles
Most of these tent styles are no longer generally available. Most of these are single-skin designs, with optional fly sheets for the ridge tents.
All the tents listed here had a canvas fabric and most used a substantial number of guy ropes (8 to 18). The guys had to be positioned and tensioned fairly precisely in order to pitch the tent correctly, so some training and experience were needed. Pup tents might use wooden or metal poles, but all the other styles mentioned here used wooden poles.
A pup tent is a small version of a ridge tent intended for 1 to 3 people. It usually has a rectangular floor of size ranging from 4 ft by 6 ft up to 6 ft by 8 ft, and ridge heights ranging from 3 ft up to 5 ft. Larger versions have side walls, usually about 1 ft high. There are guy ropes for each pole. Versions with sides add guys at each corner and in the centre of each side. These guy ropes help to maintain the required shape. Earlier versions had a single upright pole at each end, while later versions often have two poles at each end, arranged rather like an 'A' shape, in order to make access easier. Some models have a horizontal ridge pole joining the tops of the end poles to support the centre of the tent. Many armies issue pup tents as shelter halves, with each soldier carrying half a tent in his field gear, so two soldiers together can pitch a tent and share it.
A ridge tent or wall tent can sleep 5 to 8 people or more. They usually have a rectangular floor of size ranging from 8 ft by 10 ft up to 16 ft by 20 ft, and ridge heights around 6 ft to 9 ft. The side walls are usually about 3 ft high. They normally have a single upright pole at each end with the tops joined by a horizontal ridge pole. Longer models might have an additional upright pole in the centre to help support the ridge pole. They often have two guy ropes at each corner, and guy ropes every 2 ft along the sides. If strong winds are expected then two additional storm guy ropes are attached to the top of each pole. Ridge tents are often used by hunters and outfitters as they will accommodate several persons, their equipment and related gear. Many can be equipped with wood stoves for heating and cooking. There are several manufacturers in the U.S. and Canada that make wall tents that have foot prints of greater than 220 square feet. The canvas of wall tents may be treated for water, mildew and fire retardancy.
A square centre-pole tent was often used for family camping in the first half of the 20th century. Despite the use of 9 poles and 12 guy ropes, such a tent could be pitched by an experienced family of four in some 10 to 15 minutes. These tents had a square floor of size ranging from 8 by 8 ft up to 15 by 15 ft. There were poles about 5 ft high at each corner and in the middle of each side, and a 10 ft or 12 ft pole in the centre – the walls were vertical and the roof was pyramid-shaped, so there was plenty of headroom over most of the tent.
A Sibley tent (bell tent) had a circular floor plan some 10 ft to 15 ft across, a single central pole some 10 ft high, and walls about 3 ft high. Guy ropes were connected every 2 ft around the top of the walls – these had to carefully tensioned to hold the pole upright and keep the tent in shape.
Marquees and larger tents
These larger tents are seldom used for sleeping.
A marquee is a large tent used as a temporary building. They have long been used for circus or other performances, fairs, banquets, large weddings, religious tent revival events or, more recently corporate entertainment events. Traditionally made of canvas, modern "party tents" are more likely to use PE (polythene) or, for higher quality, PVC. 'DIY' marquees are available up to 20 feet (6.1 m) wide. 30 to 150 feet (9.1 to 45.7 metres) widths are very expensive and require specialized equipment and skill to erect, so they must usually be rented. Many corporations own large (9 m to 45 m wide) marquee tents but have them installed and maintained by qualified professionals. Party tents are held down with tensioned ratchets and/or stakes. Sizes range from 10 to 150 by 400 feet (3.0 to 45.7 by 121.9 metres).
A pole marquee consists of canvas and more recently PVC, under tension by means of centre poles, side poles and guy ropes which are attached to ground stakes hammered into soft surfaces only such as a lawn or field. Hand made of white cotton canvas, traditional poled marquees are more attractive but much less practical and versatile than aluminium frame marquees. The modern PVC traditional pole marquee was introduced due to the material being easier to clean than woven canvas and giving them a longer hire life span.
A tension tent is a newer variation of the pole marquee. The general design is similar to the pole marquee. However, it usually has fewer poles, and the integrity of the structure is maintained by the tension of the fabric. It also is very similar to a tensile structure It is often used for outdoor weddings, parties and other events. It has been adapted and updated in various other tent types including the High Peak Frame Tent and Freeform / Stretch / Flex Tent styles developed in South Africa
Freeform / Stretch / Flex Tents have developed since 2000 driven predominantly by companies in South Africa and in Australia. The composition of the fabric differs slightly between those from South Africa and those in Australia. Stretch Tent Fabrics have been produced using Nylon and Polyester. Since 2007 Stretch Tents have been introduced into Europe by some of the South African companies such as Intent. Stretch Tents utilize aluminum, wooden and bamboo poles capped by molded polypropylene or rubber domes that push through the stretched fabric, creating tension between the ground and the fabric. The fabric can be sculpted into various organic and curvaceous forms to provide shade and rain cover for events. The tensioned fabric must be made rigid and the tent form allow water run-off and resistance to wind load before erection is complete.
Aluminium frame marquees – Aluminium frame tents have no centre poles or guy ropes. This kind of marquee can be erected on almost any surface and adjacent to buildings or annexe tents. The Aluminium frame tent is much more stable and can span a much wider area over pools, flower beds or trees. In the UK this design is the most commonly used style for most retail rentals and can be found being used as temporary structures for storage in retail and military applications.
A newer category of the Marquee/Party tents is the High Peak Frame Tents (known by several brand names like "frame & cable", "vista", "pinnacle", "Century" etc.). These tents have the advantage of the pole tents with the high top, ease of installation, cleaner look, and fewer parts. They also have the advantage of the Frame Tents as they do not have support pole(s) on the inside of the tent that touches the ground. The high top look is accomplished by using a "floating pole", which is a pole that sits on cables that run across the tent interior from the top of the sides. Most tent manufactures are now making these tents and they come in a variety of sizes and shapes that can be joined to meet the needs of unique space requirements.
Marquee tents typically have interchangeable parts, which allow for a rental company to easily expand to larger sizes. Tents can be ordered in a variety of colours. However, white is by far the most popular colour. Skylights can also be built into the fabric, which allow a greater amount of light to enter and is useful if walls are being used. Walls can also be ordered with clear vinyl windows in them.
Shamiana is a popular Indian ethnic tent shelter, which is commonly used for outdoor parties, marriages, restaurants etc. Its side walls are detachable. The external fabric can be multicolored or can hold exquisite designs. The history of Shamiana, dates back to the Mughal era. As per Government of India service tax rules under Finance Act 1997, the definition of Shamiana is given under the clause (77A) of section 65, that is: "pandal or shamiana means a place specially prepared or arranged for organizing an official, social or business function".
"Bail Ring Tents" are usually tents that are 100 to 150 feet (30 to 46 metres) wide and expandable to any length. They can be made from either vinyl or canvas. The purpose of the bail ring style is to raise an enormous amount of material "the tent" off the ground without using heavy machinery. Initially, the center poles are raised and guyed out to stakes after which the tent is spread out and connected to the bail ring using shackles. Once the outside of the tent is raised a crew of men can go under the tent and start raising the bail ring up the center pole using a system of pulleys. This style of tent is not as popular as it was in the past due to the advancement of forklifts and skidsteers. There was a time when even smaller tents 40 to 100 feet (12 to 30 metres) were often raised and set using a bail ring.
The four Major golf tournaments have tents set up. They are usually 40 by 40 feet (12 by 12 metres).
Tents or marquees are often hired from specialist companies.
A "Rubb Hall" is a large tent used primarily as emergency warehousing.
A circus tent usually has one or more oval or circular arenas surrounded by tiered seating which might accommodate thousands of people. Nowadays such large tents are made of some artificial fibre (polyester or vinyl) and are often erected with the help of cranes. In earlier times it was common for the circus elephants to be used as a source of power for pulling ropes to haul the canvas into position.
Spiegeltent, a Belgian tent constructed in wood and canvas and decorated with mirrors and stained glass, intended as an entertainment venue
Influence on building design
Tent design has influenced many large modern buildings. These buildings have in turn influenced the next generation of tent design. Tent-style tensile structures are used to cover large public areas such as entertainment venues, arenas and retail areas (example: The O2) or sports stadiums (example: Munich Olympic Stadium) and airports (example: Denver International Airport). The Sami Parliament of Norway is inspired by the lavvu, a tent traditionally used by the Sami people.

A tent platform is a floor for the purpose of pitching one or more tents upon. Typically, it is a wooden deck near a hiking trail that provides the hikers a clean and even place to sleep. It may also prevent the campers from trampling down the surrounding vegetation. Many campsites have tent platforms.
Mountaineers sometimes build tent platforms in their base camps from materials such as pebble or snow.
There are roofed, suspended, floating, stacked or portable tent platforms. There are tent platforms mounted on top of automobiles, which support roof tents.
Large-sized commercial or military tents do often stand on flooring systems, which are large-sized tent platforms.

The San Juan and New York Smelting Company, (later on merged into the American Smelting & Refining Company, but commonly referred to as the "Durango Smelter") was a mineral smelter located below Smelter Mountain right in front of Durango, Colorado, operating from 1882 to 1930, processing Coke, Lead, Copper, Silver, and Gold from mines all over La Plata County, San Juan County, and elsewhere in the Southwestern Colorado Region generally serviced by railroad. It was later reinstated during World War II by the U. S. Vanadium Corporation for production of large amounts of Uranium that would be utilized in the Manhattan Project. From 1963 on the smelter sat dormant until the U.S. Department of Energy cleaned up the site from 1985 to 1987 due to concerns regarding toxic mineral tailings/radioactive waste, as well as the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment suing ASARCO (the successor to the American Smelting and Refining Company) or damages to natural resources in 1983. Today the site is now the City of Durango's dog park and also considered a popular local hike.
History
John Porter, a mining engineer, first came to the Southwestern Colorado area in 1875. Age 30 at the time, the Connecticut-born metallurgist and smelterman established the Greene Smelter in Silverton, Colorado, but then moved on to Eureka, Nevada. In 1881 the Denver & Rio Grande Railroad had made its way into the Animas Valley with its eyes set on serving the mining district of Silverton. Once the railroad established the townsite of Durango, D&RG President William Jackson Palmer with his associate William Bell convinced Porter that Durango would be a more ideal location for a smelter and asked him to return to the area, in order to move the Greene smelter and operate the new smelter location in Durango under their recently incorporated San Juan and New York Smelting Company. Starting operations in 1882, the Durango Smelter prospered under Porter's management; by 1887 it smelted over $1 million in Silver, Lead, Gold and Copper.
John Porter would later go on to start other coal mines around the Durango area to help fuel the Smelter, under the name of his Porter Fuel Company, most notably the Porter Coal Mine, which was located west of Durango in Wild Cat Canyon. His company would later be purchased by the Union Pacific Coal Company on February 1, 1906, and moved the main offices to Omaha, Nebraska.
In 1888 the San Juan and New York Smelting Company had reorganized and leased the Durango Smelter to the Omaha and Grant Smelting and Refining Company. John Porter gave up his position as manager, although he retained a role as "executive adviser" for several years after. Later in 1899 the company had been merged with the American Smelting and Refining Company, operating it with lower production numbers into the 1920s and eventually closing the smelter down in 1930.
From 1903 to 1904 the Durango Smelter played a role in Colorado Labor Wars, when smelter workers went on strike. The strikes around Colorado helped influence Colorado Labor Laws.

In archaeology, a tool stone is a type of stone that is used to manufacture stone tools,
or tools that use stone as raw material.
Generally speaking, tools that require a sharp edge are made using cryptocrystalline materials that fracture in an easily controlled conchoidal manner.
Cryptocrystalline tool stones include flint and chert, which are fine-grained sedimentary materials; rhyolite and felsite, which are igneous flowstones; and obsidian, a form of natural glass created by igneous processes. These materials fracture in a predictable fashion, and are easily resharpened. For more information on this subject, see lithic reduction.
Large-grained materials such as basalt, granite and sandstone may also be used as tool stones, but for a very different purpose: they are ideal for ground stone artifacts. Whereas cryptocrystalline materials are most useful for killing and processing animals, large-grained materials are usually used for processing plant matter. Their rough faces often make excellent surfaces for grinding plant seeds. With much effort, some large-grained stones may be ground down into awls, adzes, and axes.

In botany, a tree is a perennial plant with an elongated stem, or trunk, usually supporting branches and leaves. In some usages, the definition of a tree may be narrower, e.g., including only woody plants with secondary growth, only plants that are usable as lumber, or only plants above a specified height. Wider definitions include taller palms, tree ferns, bananas, and bamboos.
Trees are not a monophyletic taxonomic group but consist of a wide variety of plant species that have independently evolved a trunk and branches as a way to tower above other plants to compete for sunlight. The majority of tree species are angiosperms or hardwoods; of the rest, many are gymnosperms or softwoods. Trees tend to be long-lived, some trees reaching several thousand years old. The earliest trees evolved around 400 million years ago, and it is estimated that there are around three trillion mature trees in the world currently.
A tree typically has many secondary branches supported clear of the ground by the trunk, which typically contains woody tissue for strength, and vascular tissue to carry materials from one part of the tree to another. For most trees the trunk is surrounded by a layer of bark which serves as a protective barrier. Below the ground, the roots branch and spread out widely; they serve to anchor the tree and extract moisture and nutrients from the soil. Above ground, the branches divide into smaller branches and shoots. The shoots typically bear leaves, which capture light energy and convert it into sugars by photosynthesis, providing the food for the tree's growth and development.
Trees usually reproduce using seeds. Flowering plants have their seeds inside fruits, while conifers carry their seeds in cones, and tree ferns produce spores instead.
Trees play a significant role in reducing erosion and moderating the climate. They remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and store large quantities of carbon in their tissues. Trees and forests provide a habitat for many species of animals and plants. Tropical rainforests are among the most biodiverse habitats in the world. Trees provide shade and shelter, timber for construction, fuel for cooking and heating, and fruit for food as well as having many other uses. In much of the world, forests are shrinking as trees are cleared to increase the amount of land available for agriculture. Because of their longevity and usefulness, trees have always been revered, with sacred groves in various cultures, and they play a role in many of the world's mythologies.
Definition
Although "tree" is a common word, there is no universally recognised precise definition of what a tree is, either botanically or in common language. In its broadest sense, a tree is any plant with the general form of an elongated stem, or trunk, which supports the photosynthetic leaves or branches at some distance above the ground. Trees are also typically defined by height, with smaller plants from 0.5 to 10 m (1.6 to 32.8 ft) being called shrubs, so the minimum height of a tree is only loosely defined. Large herbaceous plants such as papaya and bananas are trees in this broad sense.
A commonly applied narrower definition is that a tree has a woody trunk formed by secondary growth, meaning that the trunk thickens each year by growing outwards, in addition to the primary upwards growth from the growing tip. Under such a definition, herbaceous plants such as palms, bananas and papayas are not considered trees regardless of their height, growth form or stem girth. Certain monocots may be considered trees under a slightly looser definition; while the Joshua tree, bamboos and palms do not have secondary growth and never produce true wood with growth rings, they may produce "pseudo-wood" by lignifying cells formed by primary growth. Tree species in the genus Dracaena, despite also being monocots, do have secondary growth caused by meristem in their trunk, but it is different from the thickening meristem found in dicotyledonous trees.
Aside from structural definitions, trees are commonly defined by use; for instance, as those plants which yield lumber.
Overview
The tree growth habit is an evolutionary adaptation found in different groups of plants: by growing taller, trees are able to compete better for sunlight. Trees tend to be tall and long-lived, some reaching several thousand years old. Several trees are among the oldest organisms now living. Trees have modified structures such as thicker stems composed of specialised cells that add structural strength and durability, allowing them to grow taller than many other plants and to spread out their foliage. They differ from shrubs, which have a similar growth form, by usually growing larger and having a single main stem; but there is no consistent distinction between a tree and a shrub, made more confusing by the fact that trees may be reduced in size under harsher environmental conditions such as on mountains and subarctic areas. The tree form has evolved separately in unrelated classes of plants in response to similar environmental challenges, making it a classic example of parallel evolution. With an estimated 60,000-100,000 species, the number of trees worldwide might total twenty-five per cent of all living plant species. The greatest number of these grow in tropical regions; many of these areas have not yet been fully surveyed by botanists, making tree diversity and ranges poorly known.
The majority of tree species are angiosperms or hardwoods. Of the rest, many are gymnosperms or softwood trees; these include conifers, cycads, ginkgophytes and gnetales, which produce seeds which are not enclosed in fruits, but in open structures such as pine cones, and many have tough waxy leaves, such as pine needles. Most angiosperm trees are eudicots, the "true dicotyledons", so named because the seeds contain two cotyledons or seed leaves. There are also some trees among the old lineages of flowering plants called basal angiosperms or paleodicots; these include Amborella, Magnolia, nutmeg and avocado, while trees such as bamboo, palms and bananas are monocots.
Wood gives structural strength to the trunk of most types of tree; this supports the plant as it grows larger. The vascular system of trees allows water, nutrients and other chemicals to be distributed around the plant, and without it trees would not be able to grow as large as they do. Trees need to draw water high up the stem through the xylem from the roots by capillary action, as water continually evaporates from the leaves in the process of transpiration. If insufficient water is available the leaves will die. The three main parts of trees include the root, stem, and leaves; they are integral parts of the vascular system which interconnects all the living cells. In trees and other plants that develop wood, the vascular cambium allows the expansion of vascular tissue that produces woody growth. Because this growth ruptures the epidermis of the stem, woody plants also have a cork cambium that develops among the phloem. The cork cambium gives rise to thickened cork cells to protect the surface of the plant and reduce water loss. Both the production of wood and the production of cork are forms of secondary growth.
Trees are either evergreen, having foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year, or deciduous, shedding their leaves at the end of the growing season and then having a dormant period without foliage. Most conifers are evergreens, but larches (Larix and Pseudolarix) are deciduous, dropping their needles each autumn, and some species of cypress (Glyptostrobus, Metasequoia and Taxodium) shed small leafy shoots annually in a process known as cladoptosis. The crown is the spreading top of a tree including the branches and leaves, while the uppermost layer in a forest, formed by the crowns of the trees, is known as the canopy. A sapling is a young tree.
Many tall palms are herbaceous monocots, which do not undergo secondary growth and never produce wood. In many tall palms, the terminal bud on the main stem is the only one to develop, so they have unbranched trunks with large spirally arranged leaves. Some of the tree ferns, order Cyatheales, have tall straight trunks, growing up to 20 metres (66 ft), but these are composed not of wood but of rhizomes which grow vertically and are covered by numerous adventitious roots.
Distribution
The number of trees in the world, according to a 2015 estimate, is 3.04 trillion, of which 1.39 trillion (46%) are in the tropics or sub-tropics, 0.61 trillion (20%) in the temperate zones, and 0.74 trillion (24%) in the coniferous boreal forests. The estimate is about eight times higher than previous estimates, and is based on tree densities measured on over 400,000 plots. It remains subject to a wide margin of error, not least because the samples are mainly from Europe and North America. The estimate suggests that about 15 billion trees are cut down annually and about 5 billion are planted. In the 12,000 years since the start of human agriculture, the number of trees worldwide has decreased by 46%. There are approximately 64,100 known tree species in the world. With 43% of all tree species, South America has the highest biodiversity, followed by Eurasia (22%), Africa (16%), North America (15%), and Oceania (11%).
In suitable environments, such as the Daintree Rainforest in Queensland, or the mixed podocarp and broadleaf forest of Ulva Island, New Zealand, forest is the more-or-less stable climatic climax community at the end of a plant succession, where open areas such as grassland are colonised by taller plants, which in turn give way to trees that eventually form a forest canopy.
In cool temperate regions, conifers often predominate; a widely distributed climax community in the far north of the northern hemisphere is moist taiga or northern coniferous forest (also called boreal forest). Taiga is the world's largest land biome, forming 29% of the world's forest cover. The long cold winter of the far north is unsuitable for plant growth and trees must grow rapidly in the short summer season when the temperature rises and the days are long. Light is very limited under their dense cover and there may be little plant life on the forest floor, although fungi may abound. Similar woodland is found on mountains where the altitude causes the average temperature to be lower thus reducing the length of the growing season.
Where rainfall is relatively evenly spread across the seasons in temperate regions, temperate broadleaf and mixed forest typified by species like oak, beech, birch and maple is found. Temperate forest is also found in the southern hemisphere, as for example in the Eastern Australia temperate forest, characterised by Eucalyptus forest and open acacia woodland.
In tropical regions with a monsoon or monsoon-like climate, where a drier part of the year alternates with a wet period as in the Amazon rainforest, different species of broad-leaved trees dominate the forest, some of them being deciduous. In tropical regions with a drier savanna climate and insufficient rainfall to support dense forests, the canopy is not closed, and plenty of sunshine reaches the ground which is covered with grass and scrub. Acacia and baobab are well adapted to living in such areas.
Parts
Roots
The roots of a tree serve to anchor it to the ground and gather water and nutrients to transfer to all parts of the tree. They are also used for reproduction, defence, survival, energy storage and many other purposes. The radicle or embryonic root is the first part of a seedling to emerge from the seed during the process of germination. This develops into a taproot which goes straight downwards. Within a few weeks lateral roots branch out of the side of this and grow horizontally through the upper layers of the soil. In most trees, the taproot eventually withers away and the wide-spreading laterals remain. Near the tip of the finer roots are single cell root hairs. These are in immediate contact with the soil particles and can absorb water and nutrients such as potassium in solution. The roots require oxygen to respire and only a few species such as mangroves and the pond cypress (Taxodium ascendens) can live in permanently waterlogged soil.
In the soil, the roots encounter the hyphae of fungi. Many of these are known as mycorrhiza and form a mutualistic relationship with the tree roots. Some are specific to a single tree species, which will not flourish in the absence of its mycorrhizal associate. Others are generalists and associate with many species. The tree acquires minerals such as phosphorus from the fungus, while the fungus obtains the carbohydrate products of photosynthesis from the tree. The hyphae of the fungus can link different trees and a network is formed, transferring nutrients and signals from one place to another. The fungus promotes growth of the roots and helps protect the trees against predators and pathogens. It can also limit damage done to a tree by pollution as the fungus accumulate heavy metals within its tissues. Fossil evidence shows that roots have been associated with mycorrhizal fungi since the early Paleozoic, four hundred million years ago, when the first vascular plants colonised dry land.
Some trees such as Alder (Alnus species) have a symbiotic relationship with Frankia species, a filamentous bacterium that can fix nitrogen from the air, converting it into ammonia. They have actinorhizal root nodules on their roots in which the bacteria live. This process enables the tree to live in low nitrogen habitats where they would otherwise be unable to thrive. The plant hormones called cytokinins initiate root nodule formation, in a process closely related to mycorrhizal association.
It has been demonstrated that some trees are interconnected through their root system, forming a colony. The interconnections are made by the inosculation process, a kind of natural grafting or welding of vegetal tissues. The tests to demonstrate this networking are performed by injecting chemicals, sometimes radioactive, into a tree, and then checking for its presence in neighbouring trees.
The roots are, generally, an underground part of the tree, but some tree species have evolved roots that are aerial. The common purposes for aerial roots may be of two kinds, to contribute to the mechanical stability of the tree, and to obtain oxygen from air. An instance of mechanical stability enhancement is the red mangrove that develops prop roots that loop out of the trunk and branches and descend vertically into the mud. A similar structure is developed by the Indian banyan. Many large trees have buttress roots which flare out from the lower part of the trunk. These brace the tree rather like angle brackets and provide stability, reducing sway in high winds. They are particularly prevalent in tropical rainforests where the soil is poor and the roots are close to the surface.
Some tree species have developed root extensions that pop out of soil, in order to get oxygen, when it is not available in the soil because of excess water. These root extensions are called pneumatophores, and are present, among others, in black mangrove and pond cypress.
Trunk
The main purpose of the trunk is to raise the leaves above the ground, enabling the tree to overtop other plants and outcompete them for light. It also transports water and nutrients from the roots to the aerial parts of the tree, and distributes the food produced by the leaves to all other parts, including the roots.
In the case of angiosperms and gymnosperms, the outermost layer of the trunk is the bark, mostly composed of dead cells of phellem (cork). It provides a thick, waterproof covering to the living inner tissue. It protects the trunk against the elements, disease, animal attack and fire. It is perforated by a large number of fine breathing pores called lenticels, through which oxygen diffuses. Bark is continually replaced by a living layer of cells called the cork cambium or phellogen. The London plane (Platanus × hispanica) periodically sheds its bark in large flakes. Similarly, the bark of the silver birch (Betula pendula) peels off in strips. As the tree's girth expands, newer layers of bark are larger in circumference, and the older layers develop fissures in many species. In some trees such as the pine (Pinus species) the bark exudes sticky resin which deters attackers whereas in rubber trees (Hevea brasiliensis) it is a milky latex that oozes out. The quinine bark tree (Cinchona officinalis) contains bitter substances to make the bark unpalatable. Large tree-like plants with lignified trunks in the Pteridophyta, Arecales, Cycadophyta and Poales such as the tree ferns, palms, cycads and bamboos have different structures and outer coverings.
Although the bark functions as a protective barrier, it is itself attacked by boring insects such as beetles. These lay their eggs in crevices and the larvae chew their way through the cellulose tissues leaving a gallery of tunnels. This may allow fungal spores to gain admittance and attack the tree. Dutch elm disease is caused by a fungus (Ophiostoma species) carried from one elm tree to another by various beetles. The tree reacts to the growth of the fungus by blocking off the xylem tissue carrying sap upwards and the branch above, and eventually the whole tree, is deprived of nourishment and dies. In Britain in the 1990s, 25 million elm trees were killed by this disease.
The innermost layer of bark is known as the phloem and this is involved in the transport of the sap containing the sugars made by photosynthesis to other parts of the tree. It is a soft spongy layer of living cells, some of which are arranged end to end to form tubes. These are supported by parenchyma cells which provide padding and include fibres for strengthening the tissue. Inside the phloem is a layer of undifferentiated cells one cell thick called the vascular cambium layer. The cells are continually dividing, creating phloem cells on the outside and wood cells known as xylem on the inside.
The newly created xylem is the sapwood. It is composed of water-conducting cells and associated cells which are often living, and is usually pale in colour. It transports water and minerals from the roots to the upper parts of the tree. The oldest, inner part of the sapwood is progressively converted into heartwood as new sapwood is formed at the cambium. The conductive cells of the heartwood are blocked in some species. Heartwood is usually darker in colour than the sapwood. It is the dense central core of the trunk giving it rigidity. Three quarters of the dry mass of the xylem is cellulose, a polysaccharide, and most of the remainder is lignin, a complex polymer. A transverse section through a tree trunk or a horizontal core will show concentric circles of lighter or darker wood – tree rings. These rings are the annual growth rings There may also be rays running at right angles to growth rings. These are vascular rays which are thin sheets of living tissue permeating the wood. Many older trees may become hollow but may still stand upright for many years.
Buds and growth
Trees do not usually grow continuously throughout the year but mostly have spurts of active expansion followed by periods of rest. This pattern of growth is related to climatic conditions; growth normally ceases when conditions are either too cold or too dry. In readiness for the inactive period, trees form buds to protect the meristem, the zone of active growth. Before the period of dormancy, the last few leaves produced at the tip of a twig form scales. These are thick, small and closely wrapped and enclose the growing point in a waterproof sheath. Inside this bud there is a rudimentary stalk and neatly folded miniature leaves, ready to expand when the next growing season arrives. Buds also form in the axils of the leaves ready to produce new side shoots. A few trees, such as the eucalyptus, have "naked buds" with no protective scales and some conifers, such as the Lawson's cypress, have no buds but instead have little pockets of meristem concealed among the scale-like leaves.
When growing conditions improve, such as the arrival of warmer weather and the longer days associated with spring in temperate regions, growth starts again. The expanding shoot pushes its way out, shedding the scales in the process. These leave behind scars on the surface of the twig. The whole year's growth may take place in just a few weeks. The new stem is unlignified at first and may be green and downy. The Arecaceae (palms) have their leaves spirally arranged on an unbranched trunk. In some tree species in temperate climates, a second spurt of growth, a Lammas growth may occur which is believed to be a strategy to compensate for loss of early foliage to insect predators.
Primary growth is the elongation of the stems and roots. Secondary growth consists of a progressive thickening and strengthening of the tissues as the outer layer of the epidermis is converted into bark and the cambium layer creates new phloem and xylem cells. The bark is inelastic. Eventually the growth of a tree slows down and stops and it gets no taller. If damage occurs the tree may in time become hollow.
Leaves
Leaves are structures specialised for photosynthesis and are arranged on the tree in such a way as to maximise their exposure to light without shading each other. They are an important investment by the tree and may be thorny or contain phytoliths, lignins, tannins or poisons to discourage herbivory. Trees have evolved leaves in a wide range of shapes and sizes, in response to environmental pressures including climate and predation. They can be broad or needle-like, simple or compound, lobed or entire, smooth or hairy, delicate or tough, deciduous or evergreen. The needles of coniferous trees are compact but are structurally similar to those of broad-leaved trees. They are adapted for life in environments where resources are low or water is scarce. Frozen ground may limit water availability and conifers are often found in colder places at higher altitudes and higher latitudes than broad leaved trees. In conifers such as fir trees, the branches hang down at an angle to the trunk, enabling them to shed snow. In contrast, broad leaved trees in temperate regions deal with winter weather by shedding their leaves. When the days get shorter and the temperature begins to decrease, the leaves no longer make new chlorophyll and the red and yellow pigments already present in the blades become apparent. Synthesis in the leaf of a plant hormone called auxin also ceases. This causes the cells at the junction of the petiole and the twig to weaken until the joint breaks and the leaf floats to the ground. In tropical and subtropical regions, many trees keep their leaves all year round. Individual leaves may fall intermittently and be replaced by new growth but most leaves remain intact for some time. Other tropical species and those in arid regions may shed all their leaves annually, such as at the start of the dry season. Many deciduous trees flower before the new leaves emerge. A few trees do not have true leaves but instead have structures with similar external appearance such as Phylloclades – modified stem structures – as seen in the genus Phyllocladus.
Reproduction
Trees can be pollinated either by wind or by animals, mostly insects. Many angiosperm trees are insect pollinated. Wind pollination may take advantage of increased wind speeds high above the ground. Trees use a variety of methods of seed dispersal. Some rely on wind, with winged or plumed seeds. Others rely on animals, for example with edible fruits. Others again eject their seeds (ballistic dispersal), or use gravity so that seeds fall and sometimes roll.
Seeds
Seeds are the primary way that trees reproduce and their seeds vary greatly in size and shape. Some of the largest seeds come from trees, but the largest tree, Sequoiadendron giganteum, produces one of the smallest tree seeds. The great diversity in tree fruits and seeds reflects the many different ways that tree species have evolved to disperse their offspring. For a tree seedling to grow into an adult tree it needs light. If seeds only fell straight to the ground, competition among the concentrated saplings and the shade of the parent would likely prevent it from flourishing. Many seeds such as birch are small and have papery wings to aid dispersal by the wind. Ash trees and maples have larger seeds with blade shaped wings which spiral down to the ground when released. The kapok tree has cottony threads to catch the breeze. The flame tree Delonix regia shoots its seeds through the air when the two sides of its long pods crack apart explosively on drying. The miniature cone-like catkins of alder trees produce seeds that contain small droplets of oil that help disperse the seeds on the surface of water. Mangroves often grow in water and some species have buoyant fruits with seeds that start germinating before they detach from the parent tree. These float on the water and may become lodged on emerging mudbanks and successfully take root.
Other seeds, such as apple pips and plum stones, have fleshy receptacles and smaller fruits like hawthorns have seeds enclosed in edible tissue; animals including mammals and birds eat the fruits and either discard the seeds, or swallow them so they pass through the gut to be deposited in the animal's droppings well away from the parent tree. The germination of some seeds is improved when they are processed in this way. Nuts may be gathered by animals such as squirrels that cache any not immediately consumed. Many of these caches are never revisited; the nut-casing softens with rain and frost, and the surviving seeds germinate in the spring. Pine cones may similarly be hoarded by red squirrels, and grizzly bears may help to disperse the seed by raiding squirrel caches.
The seeds of conifers, the largest group of gymnosperms, are enclosed in a cone and most species have seeds that are light and papery that can be blown considerable distances once free from the cone. Sometimes the seed remains in the cone for years waiting for a trigger event to liberate it. Fire stimulates release and germination of seeds of the jack pine, and also enriches the forest floor with wood ash and removes competing vegetation. Similarly, a number of angiosperms including Acacia cyclops and Acacia mangium have seeds that germinate better after exposure to high temperatures. The single extant species of Ginkgophyta (Ginkgo biloba) has fleshy seeds produced at the ends of short branches on female trees, and Gnetum, a tropical and subtropical group of gymnosperms produce seeds at the tip of a shoot axis.
Evolutionary history
The earliest trees were tree ferns, horsetails and lycophytes, which grew in forests in the Carboniferous period. The first tree may have been Wattieza, fossils of which were found in New York state in 2007 dating back to the Middle Devonian (about 385 million years ago). Prior to this discovery, Archaeopteris was the earliest known tree. Both of these reproduced by spores rather than seeds and are considered to be links between ferns and the gymnosperms which evolved in the Triassic period. The gymnosperms include conifers, cycads, gnetales and ginkgos and these may have appeared as a result of a whole genome duplication event which took place about 319 million years ago. Ginkgophyta was once a widespread diverse group of which the only survivor is the maidenhair tree Ginkgo biloba. This is considered to be a living fossil because it is virtually unchanged from the fossilised specimens found in Triassic deposits.
During the Mesozoic (245 to 66 million years ago) the conifers flourished and became adapted to live in all the major terrestrial habitats. Subsequently, the tree forms of flowering plants evolved during the Cretaceous period. These began to displace the conifers during the Tertiary era (66 to 2 million years ago) when forests covered the globe. When the climate cooled 1.5 million years ago and the first of four glacial periods occurred, the forests retreated as the ice advanced. In the interglacials, trees recolonised the land that had been covered by ice, only to be driven back again in the next glacial period.
Ecology
Trees are an important part of the terrestrial ecosystem, providing essential habitats including many kinds of forest for communities of organisms. Epiphytic plants such as ferns, some mosses, liverworts, orchids and some species of parasitic plants (e.g., mistletoe) hang from branches; these along with arboreal lichens, algae, and fungi provide micro-habitats for themselves and for other organisms, including animals. Leaves, flowers and fruits are seasonally available. On the ground underneath trees there is shade, and often there is undergrowth, leaf litter, and decaying wood that provide other habitat. Trees stabilise the soil, prevent rapid run-off of rain water, help prevent desertification, have a role in climate control and help in the maintenance of biodiversity and ecosystem balance.
Many species of tree support their own specialised invertebrates. In their natural habitats, 284 different species of insect have been found on the English oak (Quercus robur) and 306 species of invertebrate on the Tasmanian oak (Eucalyptus obliqua). Non-native tree species provide a less biodiverse community, for example in the United Kingdom the sycamore (Acer pseudoplatanus), which originates from southern Europe, has few associated invertebrate species, though its bark supports a wide range of lichens, bryophytes and other epiphytes. Trees differ ecologically in the ease with which they can be found by herbivores. Tree apparency varies with a tree's size and semiochemical content, and with the extent to which it is concealed by nonhost neighbours from its insect pests.
In ecosystems such as mangrove swamps, trees play a role in developing the habitat, since the roots of the mangrove trees reduce the speed of flow of tidal currents and trap water-borne sediment, reducing the water depth and creating suitable conditions for further mangrove colonisation. Thus mangrove swamps tend to extend seawards in suitable locations. Mangrove swamps also provide an effective buffer against the more damaging effects of cyclones and tsunamis.
Uses
Food
Trees are the source of many of the world's best known fleshy fruits. Apples, pears, plums, cherries and citrus are all grown commercially in temperate climates and a wide range of edible fruits are found in the tropics. Other commercially important fruit include dates, figs and olives. Palm oil is obtained from the fruits of the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis). The fruits of the cocoa tree (Theobroma cacao) are used to make cocoa and chocolate and the berries of coffee trees, Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora, are processed to extract the coffee beans. In many rural areas of the world, fruit is gathered from forest trees for consumption. Many trees bear edible nuts which can loosely be described as being large, oily kernels found inside a hard shell. These include coconuts (Cocos nucifera), Brazil nuts (Bertholletia excelsa), pecans (Carya illinoinensis), hazel nuts (Corylus), almonds (Prunus dulcis), walnuts (Juglans regia), pistachios (Pistacia vera) and many others. They are high in nutritive value and contain high-quality protein, vitamins and minerals as well as dietary fibre. A variety of nut oils are extracted by pressing for culinary use; some such as walnut, pistachio and hazelnut oils are prized for their distinctive flavours, but they tend to spoil quickly.
In temperate climates there is a sudden movement of sap at the end of the winter as trees prepare to burst into growth. In North America, the sap of the sugar maple (Acer saccharum) is used in the production of maple syrup. About 90% of the sap is water, the remaining 10% being a mixture of various sugars and certain minerals. The sap is harvested by drilling holes in the trunks of the trees and collecting the liquid that flows out of the inserted spigots; the sap is then heated to concentrate the flavour. Similarly in northern Europe the spring rise in the sap of the silver birch (Betula pendula) is tapped and collected, either to be drunk fresh or fermented into an alcoholic drink. In Alaska, the sap of the sweet birch (Betula lenta) is made into a syrup with a sugar content of 67%. Sweet birch sap is more dilute than maple sap; a hundred litres are required to make one litre of birch syrup.
Various parts of trees are used as spices. These include cinnamon, made from the bark of the cinnamon tree (Cinnamomum zeylanicum) and allspice, the dried small fruits of the pimento tree (Pimenta dioica). Nutmeg is a seed found in the fleshy fruit of the nutmeg tree (Myristica fragrans) and cloves are the unopened flower buds of the clove tree (Syzygium aromaticum).
Many trees have flowers rich in nectar which are attractive to bees. The production of forest honey is an important industry in rural areas of the developing world where it is undertaken by small-scale beekeepers using traditional methods. The flowers of the elder (Sambucus) are used to make elderflower cordial and petals of the plum (Prunus spp.) can be candied. Sassafras oil is a flavouring obtained from distilling bark from the roots of the sassafras tree (Sassafras albidum).
The leaves of trees are widely gathered as fodder for livestock and some can be eaten by humans but they tend to be high in tannins which makes them bitter. Leaves of the curry tree (Murraya koenigii) are eaten, those of kaffir lime (Citrus × hystrix) (in Thai food) and Ailanthus (in Korean dishes such as bugak) and those of the European bay tree (Laurus nobilis) and the California bay tree (Umbellularia californica) are used for flavouring food. Camellia sinensis, the source of tea, is a small tree but seldom reaches its full height, being heavily pruned to make picking the leaves easier.
Wood smoke can be used to preserve food. In the hot smoking process the food is exposed to smoke and heat in a controlled environment. The food is ready to eat when the process is complete, having been tenderised and flavoured by the smoke it has absorbed. In the cold process, the temperature is not allowed to rise above 100 °F (38 °C). The flavour of the food is enhanced but raw food requires further cooking. If it is to be preserved, meat should be cured before cold smoking.
Fuel
Wood has traditionally been used for fuel, especially in rural areas. In less developed nations it may be the only fuel available and collecting firewood is often a time-consuming task as it becomes necessary to travel further and further afield in the search for fuel. It is often burned inefficiently on an open fire. In more developed countries other fuels are available and burning wood is a choice rather than a necessity. Modern wood-burning stoves are very fuel efficient and new products such as wood pellets are available to burn.
Charcoal can be made by slow pyrolysis of wood by heating it in the absence of air in a kiln. The carefully stacked branches, often oak, are burned with a very limited amount of air. The process of converting them into charcoal takes about fifteen hours. Charcoal is used as a fuel in barbecues and by blacksmiths and has many industrial and other uses.
Timber
Timber, "trees that are grown in order to produce wood" is cut into lumber (sawn wood) for use in construction. Wood has been an important, easily available material for construction since humans started building shelters. Engineered wood products are available which bind the particles, fibres or veneers of wood together with adhesives to form composite materials. Plastics have taken over from wood for some traditional uses.
Wood is used in the construction of buildings, bridges, trackways, piles, poles for power lines, masts for boats, pit props, railway sleepers, fencing, hurdles, shuttering for concrete, pipes, scaffolding and pallets. In housebuilding it is used in joinery, for making joists, roof trusses, roofing shingles, thatching, staircases, doors, window frames, floor boards, parquet flooring, panelling and cladding.
Wood is used to construct carts, farm implements, boats, dugout canoes and in shipbuilding. It is used for making furniture, tool handles, boxes, ladders, musical instruments, bows, weapons, matches, clothes pegs, brooms, shoes, baskets, turnery, carving, toys, pencils, rollers, cogs, wooden screws, barrels, coffins, skittles, veneers, artificial limbs, oars, skis, wooden spoons, sports equipment and wooden balls.
Wood is pulped for paper and used in the manufacture of cardboard and made into engineered wood products for use in construction such as fibreboard, hardboard, chipboard and plywood. The wood of gymnosperms is known as softwood while that of angiosperms is known as hardwood.
Art
Besides inspiring artists down the centuries, trees have been used to create art. Living trees have been used in bonsai and in tree shaping, and both living and dead specimens have been sculpted into sometimes fantastic shapes.
Bonsai
Bonsai (盆栽; lit. "Tray planting") is the practice of growing and shaping small trees, originating in China as penjing and spreading to Japan more than a thousand years ago, there are also similar practices in other cultures like the living miniature landscapes of Vietnam hòn non bộ. The word bonsai is often used in English as an umbrella term for all miniature trees in containers or pots.
The purposes of bonsai are primarily contemplation (for the viewer) and the pleasant exercise of effort and ingenuity (for the grower). Bonsai practice focuses on long-term cultivation and shaping of one or more small trees growing in a container, beginning with a cutting, seedling, or small tree of a species suitable for bonsai development. Bonsai can be created from nearly any perennial woody-stemmed tree or shrub species that produces true branches and can be cultivated to remain small through pot confinement with crown and root pruning. Some species are popular as bonsai material because they have characteristics, such as small leaves or needles, that make them appropriate for the compact visual scope of bonsai and a miniature deciduous forest can even be created using such species as Japanese maple, Japanese zelkova or hornbeam.
Tree shaping
Tree shaping is the practice of changing living trees and other woody plants into man made shapes for art and useful structures. There are a few different methods of shaping a tree. There is a gradual method and there is an instant method. The gradual method slowly guides the growing tip along predetermined pathways over time whereas the instant method bends and weaves saplings 2 to 3 m (6.6 to 9.8 ft) long into a shape that becomes more rigid as they thicken up. Most artists use grafting of living trunks, branches, and roots, for art or functional structures and there are plans to grow "living houses" with the branches of trees knitting together to give a solid, weatherproof exterior combined with an interior application of straw and clay to provide a stucco-like inner surface.
Tree shaping has been practised for at least several hundred years, the oldest known examples being the living root bridges built and maintained by the Khasi people of Meghalaya, India using the roots of the rubber tree (Ficus elastica).
Bark
Cork is produced from the thick bark of the cork oak (Quercus suber). It is harvested from the living trees about once every ten years in an environmentally sustainable industry. More than half the world's cork comes from Portugal and is largely used to make stoppers for wine bottles. Other uses include floor tiles, bulletin boards, balls, footwear, cigarette tips, packaging, insulation and joints in woodwind instruments.
The bark of other varieties of oak has traditionally been used in Europe for the tanning of hides though bark from other species of tree has been used elsewhere. The active ingredient, tannin, is extracted and after various preliminary treatments, the skins are immersed in a series of vats containing solutions in increasing concentrations. The tannin causes the hide to become supple, less affected by water and more resistant to bacterial attack.
At least 120 drugs come from plant sources, many of them from the bark of trees. Quinine originates from the cinchona tree (Cinchona) and was for a long time the remedy of choice for the treatment of malaria. Aspirin was synthesised to replace the sodium salicylate derived from the bark of willow trees (Salix) which had unpleasant side effects. The anti-cancer drug Paclitaxel is derived from taxol, a substance found in the bark of the Pacific yew (Taxus brevifolia). Other tree based drugs come from the paw-paw (Carica papaya), the cassia (Cassia spp.), the cocoa tree (Theobroma cacao), the tree of life (Camptotheca acuminata) and the downy birch (Betula pubescens).
The papery bark of the paper birch (Betula papyrifera) tree was used extensively by Native Americans. Wigwams were covered by it and canoes were constructed from it. Other uses included food containers, hunting and fishing equipment, musical instruments, toys and sledges. Nowadays, bark chips, a by-product of the timber industry, are used as a mulch and as a growing medium for epiphytic plants that need a soil-free compost.
Ornamental trees
Trees create a visual impact in the same way as do other landscape features and give a sense of maturity and permanence to park and garden. They are grown for the beauty of their forms, their foliage, flowers, fruit and bark and their siting is of major importance in creating a landscape. They can be grouped informally, often surrounded by plantings of bulbs, laid out in stately avenues or used as specimen trees. As living things, their appearance changes with the season and from year to year.
Trees are often planted in town environments where they are known as street trees or amenity trees. They can provide shade and cooling through evapotranspiration, absorb greenhouse gases and pollutants, intercept rainfall, and reduce the risk of flooding. Scientific studies show that street trees help cities be more sustainable, and improve the physical and mental wellbeing of the citizens. It has been shown that they are beneficial to humans in creating a sense of well-being and reducing stress. Many towns have initiated tree-planting programmes. In London for example, there is an initiative to plant 20,000 new street trees and to have an increase in tree cover of 5% by 2025, equivalent to one tree for every resident.
Other uses
Latex is a sticky defensive secretion that protects plants against herbivores. Many trees produce it when injured but the main source of the latex used to make natural rubber is the Pará rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis). Originally used to create bouncy balls and for the waterproofing of cloth, natural rubber is now mainly used in tyres for which synthetic materials have proved less durable. The latex exuded by the balatá tree (Manilkara bidentata) is used to make golf balls and is similar to gutta-percha, made from the latex of the "getah perca" tree Palaquium. This is also used as an insulator, particularly of undersea cables, and in dentistry, walking sticks and gun butts. It has now largely been replaced by synthetic materials.
Resin is another plant exudate that may have a defensive purpose. It is a viscous liquid composed mainly of volatile terpenes and is produced mostly by coniferous trees. It is used in varnishes, for making small castings and in ten-pin bowling balls. When heated, the terpenes are driven off and the remaining product is called "rosin" and is used by stringed instrumentalists on their bows. Some resins contain essential oils and are used in incense and aromatherapy. Fossilised resin is known as amber and was mostly formed in the Cretaceous (145 to 66 million years ago) or more recently. The resin that oozed out of trees sometimes trapped insects or spiders and these are still visible in the interior of the amber.
The camphor tree (Cinnamomum camphora) produces an essential oil and the eucalyptus tree (Eucalyptus globulus) is the main source of eucalyptus oil which is used in medicine, as a fragrance and in industry.
Threats
Individual trees
Dead trees pose a safety risk, especially during high winds and severe storms, and removing dead trees involves a financial burden, whereas the presence of healthy trees can clean the air, increase property values, and reduce the temperature of the built environment and thereby reduce building cooling costs. During times of drought, trees can fall into water stress, which may cause a tree to become more susceptible to disease and insect problems, and ultimately may lead to a tree's death. Irrigating trees during dry periods can reduce the risk of water stress and death.
Conservation
About a third of all tree species, some twenty thousand, are included in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Of those, over eight thousand are globally threatened, including at least 1400 which are classed as "critically endangered".
Mythology
Trees have been venerated since time immemorial. To the ancient Celts, certain trees, especially the oak, ash and thorn, held special significance as providing fuel, building materials, ornamental objects and weaponry. Other cultures have similarly revered trees, often linking the lives and fortunes of individuals to them or using them as oracles. In Greek mythology, dryads were believed to be shy nymphs who inhabited trees.
The Oubangui people of west Africa plant a tree when a child is born. As the tree flourishes, so does the child but if the tree fails to thrive, the health of the child is considered at risk. When it flowers it is time for marriage. Gifts are left at the tree periodically and when the individual dies, their spirit is believed to live on in the tree.
Trees have their roots in the ground and their trunk and branches extended towards the sky. This concept is found in many of the world's religions as a tree which links the underworld and the earth and holds up the heavens. In Norse mythology, Yggdrasil is a central cosmic tree whose roots and branches extend to various worlds. Various creatures live on it. In India, Kalpavriksha is a wish-fulfilling tree, one of the nine jewels that emerged from the primitive ocean. Icons are placed beneath it to be worshipped, tree nymphs inhabit the branches and it grants favours to the devout who tie threads round the trunk. Democracy started in North America when the Great Peacemaker formed the Iroquois Confederacy, inspiring the warriors of the original five American nations to bury their weapons under the Tree of Peace, an eastern white pine (Pinus strobus). In the creation story in the Bible, the tree of life and the knowledge of good and evil was planted by God in the Garden of Eden. In the cosmology of the Meso-American Maya culture, the ceiba tree connects the planes of both the sky and the underworld, known as Xibalba, with the terrestrial world. As such, the ceiba tree is a national symbol in Guatemala.
Sacred groves exist in China, India, Africa and elsewhere. They are places where the deities live and where all the living things are either sacred or are companions of the gods. Folklore lays down the supernatural penalties that will result if desecration takes place for example by the felling of trees. Because of their protected status, sacred groves may be the only relicts of ancient forest and have a biodiversity much greater than the surrounding area. Some Ancient Indian tree deities, such as Puliyidaivalaiyamman, the Tamil deity of the tamarind tree, or Kadambariyamman, associated with the cadamba tree, were seen as manifestations of a goddess who offers her blessings by giving fruits in abundance.
Superlative trees
Trees have a theoretical maximum height of about 120 to 138 meters (393.7 to 426.5 ft). The primary reason for this is their limited ability to siphon water up the trunk, meaning if a tree is too tall, it will desiccate and die. The tallest known tree on earth is believed to be a coast redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) at Redwood National Park, California. It has been named Hyperion and is 115.85 m (380.1 ft) tall. In 2006, it was reported to be 379.1 ft (115.5 m) tall. The tallest known broad-leaved tree is a mountain ash (Eucalyptus regnans) growing in Tasmania with a height of 99.8 m (327 ft).
The largest tree by volume is believed to be a giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron giganteum) known as the General Sherman Tree in the Sequoia National Park in Tulare County, California. Only the trunk is used in the calculation and the volume is estimated to be 1,487 m3 (52,500 cu ft).
The oldest living tree with a verified age is also in California. It is a Great Basin bristlecone pine (Pinus longaeva) growing in the White Mountains. It has been dated by drilling a core sample and counting the annual rings. It is estimated to currently be 5,080 years old.
A little farther south, at Santa Maria del Tule, Oaxaca, Mexico, is the tree with the broadest trunk. It is a Montezuma cypress (Taxodium mucronatum) known as Árbol del Tule and its diameter at breast height is 11.62 m (38.1 ft) giving it a girth of 36.2 m (119 ft). The tree's trunk is far from round and the exact dimensions may be misleading as the circumference includes much empty space between the large buttress roots.

Trunk injection or endotherapy also known as vegetative endotherapy, is a method of target-precise application of pesticides, plant resistance activators, or fertilizers into the xylem vascular tissue of a tree with the purpose of protecting the tree from pests, or to inject nutrients to correct for nutrient deficiencies. This method largely relies on harnessing the tree's vascular system to translocate and distribute the active compounds into the wood, canopy and roots where protection or nutrition is needed.
Trunk injection/endotherapy is currently the most popular method for control of damaging insects, pathogens, and nematodes in landscape tree care.
Endotherapy is the concept when treatments using the appropriate material formulation are carried out from the inside out through xylem translocation in the trunk/stem of plants during the photosynthetic cycle. Trunk injection is an older term that only reflects how the technique is performed.
History
These methods were used from ancient times, Ibn-Al-Awam, is quoted by Hadj de Granade in 1158 as adding colour to flowers and flavours to fruits by injection. Leonardo da Vinci recorded in the fifteenth century the injection of arsenic to kill trees. Many others did experiments on injecting dyes into the plant and observing their translocation. In Russia methods were introduced by Shevyrev in 1894, Roth in Germany in 1896, for chlorosis treatment with ferrous salts by Nicolaev-Tzygankov (1898) and Jaczewski (1910), and for plant protection by the Polish entomologist Zygmunt Mokrzecki.
Description
Endotherapy has been developed primarily for use on large size trees and in proximity of urban areas where ground- and air-spray applications are impractical due to substantial drift-driven pesticide losses or not allowed due to potential human exposure. However, the prime driver of tree injection use has been a wide spread need for control of many invasive tree pathogens and insects pests. The most infamous examples are that of fungi in the genus Ophiostoma that cause Dutch Elm Disease (DED) and the insect known as the emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis) which have specific biologies that lead to severe internal damage of wood and thus tree death, and which make their management extremely difficult or inefficient with classical pesticide application methods. Endotherapy for tree protection is viewed as environmentally safer alternative for pesticide application since the compound is delivered within the tree, thus allowing for selective exposure to plant pests. In landscapes and urban zones trunk injection significantly reduces the non-target exposure of water, soil, air, and wildlife to pesticides and fertilizers. In the last 20 years, tree injection is gaining momentum with the development and availability of new, efficient injection devices and injectable and xylem mobile formulations of pesticides, biopesticides and nutrients.
Endotherapy works by adding a water soluble chemical formulation directly into the lower trunk of the tree structure.
Applications
A number of newly occurring and fast spreading invasive insect pests and diseases such as Polyphagous Shot Hole Borer (PSHB) (Euwallacea spp.), which can vector plant pathogenic fungus Fusarium euwallaceae, and Sudden Oak Death (SOD) caused by an Oomycete Phytophthora ramorum, establish the use of endotherapy as the most efficient tree protection technique in landscapes and urban forestry.
In the past and recently, endotherapeutic treatment using agriculture products has been investigated in the perennial trees for control of pathogens and insect pests on fruit tree crops. The most investigated are diseases and pests of avocado, coconut palm, apple, and grapevine, such as Phytophthora root rot of avocado Phytophthora cinnamomi and avocado thrips Scirtothrips perseae, fire blight Erwinia amylovora and apple scab Venturia inaequalis, oblique banded leaf roller Choristoneura rosaceana and codling moth Cydia pomonella, and grapevine downy mildew Plasmopara viticola and powdery mildew Uncinula necator. Apple trees are especially interesting as a research model in agriculture since it is known that apple production requires intensive spray schedules for control of pathogenic fungus V. inaequalis with as many as 15-22 sprays of fungicides per season in humid climate.
Endotherapy of pesticides is considered as an option for precise compound delivery which will reduce the negative impact of drift-driven pesticide losses in the environment, that occur after aerial or ground spray applications of pesticides. Besides negative consequences of frequent pesticide applications in the environment, trunk injection of grapevines is investigated in viticulture for control of pathogens with difficult biologies, such as Xylella fastidiosa, which infect and destroy woody tissues and that cannot be controlled efficiently by canopy spray applications of fungicides or bactericides. To increase the efficiency of injected compounds in trees and vines, important considerations are plant anatomy, weather and soil conditions, tree physiology processes, spatial and temporal distribution of injected compound, and the chemical properties of injected compound and formulation.

Treethanol is an ethanol fuel (more precisely cellulosic ethanol) made from trees.
Summary
The biofuel is a contender in the race to find an energy alternative to fossil fuels. Proponents of Treethanol claim that its energy yield is higher compared to the energy required for production when compared with more common sources of ethanol i.e. sugar cane and corn.
Production
Cellulosic ethanol is produced using the lignocellulose biomass that comprises much of the mass of plants. Essentially at the core of the plant material is cellulose, which can be broken down into simple carbohydrate sugars. After these sugars have been extracted, they can be then be fermented into an alcohol, which is known as ethanol. The most widely used and promising means of creating cellulosic ethanol is called the cellulolysis process. The process consists of hydrolysis on pretreated lignocellulosic materials. Then enzymes are used to break down cellulose into glucose. This glucose is then fermented and distilled. The pretreatment step mentioned above is necessary when processing cellulosic ethanol because the glucose (sugars) are not readily accessible as they are with other ethanol sources such as corn or sugar cane. Rather, the cellulose in wood must be separated from the encapsulating hemicellulose and lignin.
There are three types of pretreatment: physical, chemical, and biological. Physical treatment involves physically reducing wood particle size. This can be accomplished through chipping, grinding, etc. Biological treatments involve the use of microorganisms to break down the wood. This type is considered favorable to physical pretreatments because it consumes far less energy in comparison, but the biological method has not proven to be scalable to an industrial level. The chemical method utilizes an alkaline or otherwise acidic medium to make the cellulose within wood fibers more accessible. This has shown to be the most efficient and has the lowest energy cost.
Forest trees make up more than 90% of the total terrestrial biomass while performing functions such as carbon sequestration, producing oxygen, and promoting biodiversity. Trees are a promising source of ethanol because they grow all year round, require significantly less fertilizer and water and contain far more carbohydrates (the chemical precursors of ethanol) than food crops (like corn) do.

The Triangle of Life is an unsubstantiated idea about how to survive a major earthquake, typically promoted via viral emails. The idea advocates methods of protection very different from the mainstream advice of "drop, cover, and hold on" method that is widely supported by reputable agencies.
In particular, the method's developer and key proponent, Doug Copp, recommends that at the onset of a major earthquake, building occupants should seek shelter near solid items that will provide a protective space, a void or space that could prevent injury or permit survival in the event of a major structural failure, a "pancake collapse", and specifically advises against sheltering under tables.
Officials of many agencies, including the American Red Cross and the United States Geological Survey, have criticized the "Triangle of Life" idea, saying that it is a "misguided idea" and inappropriate for countries with modern building construction standards where total building collapse is unlikely.
Purpose
Copp's idea is focused on situations when a building completely collapses, falling straight down, rather than the far more common situations, when side-to-side shaking causes falling objects (such as trees, chimneys, furniture, and objects on shelves) to land on top of people. According to his idea, if the building collapses, then the weight of the ceilings falling upon the objects or furniture inside tends to crush them, but the height of the object that remains acts as a kind of roof beam over the space or void next to it, which will tend to end up with a sloping roof over it. Copp terms this space for survival the "triangle of life". The larger and stronger the object, the less it will compact; the less it compacts, the larger the void next to it will be. Such triangles are the most common shape to be found in a collapsed building.
Criticisms
According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the Triangle of Life is a misguided idea about the best location a person should try to occupy during an earthquake. Critics have argued that it is actually very difficult to know where these triangles will be formed, as objects (including large, heavy objects) often move around during earthquakes. It is also argued that this movement means that lying beside heavy objects is very dangerous. Statistical studies of earthquake deaths show most injuries and deaths occur due to falling objects, not structures.
A person is more likely to be injured trying to move during an earthquake rather than immediately seeking a safe space by furniture, or near an interior wall, not doorways, as they are often not structural. Different architectural standards in different countries mean that the best strategy for earthquake survival could also be different; however, for the United States, "Drop, Cover, and Hold On" is recommended.
An Iranian peer-reviewed article analyzed and compared both methods in detail, considering their application, the extent of people who are under the coverage, simplicity in transferring concepts, and the probability of reducing casualties and damage in developing countries such as Iran. It argued that "Drop, Cover and Hold on" was useful advice for people who experience smaller earthquakes without total building collapse, which is the vast majority of earthquake survivors. It found that the "Triangle of life" theoretically could be a better strategy during larger earthquakes in buildings with a skeleton (wood or concrete) during a building pancake-type collapse, but acknowledged the possible problems of large objects shifting and crushing the person from horizontal movement, inability to predict which side of an object would create a survivable space, and that the triangle of life method is also difficult to teach and communicate. It concluded that the "Triangle of Life" could harm individuals who attempted to follow the advice in buildings that did not collapse. Neither strategy was useful for the majority of the population in rural Iran because of the mud-brick architecture which has no structure. Based on the simplicity of teaching and the fact that 12,000 times more people are affected by smaller earthquakes and injured, they concluded that "Drop, Cover and Hold On" is still regarded as a better option for people during an earthquake.
Testing
In 1996, Copp claims to have made a film to prove this methodology and to have recreated a model school and home, filling them with 20 mannequins. The buildings were collapsed by earthmoving equipment that knocked the supporting pillars out. Half the mannequins were in "Duck and Cover" positions and the others in Copp's "Triangle of Life" positions. When Copp and his crew re-entered the building after the blast, they calculated that there would have been no survivors among the mannequins in "Duck and Cover" positions, but 100% survival for those hiding in the triangles beside solid objects. Copp is categorical about the importance of this technique, saying "Everyone who simply ducks and covers when buildings collapse is crushed to death – every time without exception."
However, a critic of Copp has stated that this was a rescue exercise rather than an experiment. Additionally, the exercise did not simulate the lateral movement of earthquakes, instead causing a pancake collapse, which is more common in areas of extremely poor construction and rare in developed countries. The critic concluded that Copp's results are therefore misleading.

Tribute mining is an arrangement by which a person, partnership or company works a mine or part of a mine, under a tribute agreement with the titleholder of that mine, and either pays to or receives from the titleholder a proportion of the production of the mine or of the value of the production. Miners working in this way are known as tribute miners or tributers, and the mine is said to be worked 'on tribute'. The arrangement differs from conventional contracting and employment, both in its nature and its origins.
A tributer is distinguished, from both an independent contractor and employee, in that the tributer takes over the running of the mine, or an agreed part of it, and is remunerated in a specific manner. The origins of tribute mining lie in the Stannaries of Cornwall and Devon, and the Stannary laws. John Taylor (1779-1863), a mining engineer, left a detailed description of how tribute mining was practiced, in the tin and copper mines of Cornwall and Devon during the 19th Century.
The practice of tribute mining spread to other countries. In English-speaking settler colonial societies, the spread of the practice was enhanced by the widespread emigration of Cornish miners and mine managers. Cornish influence also led to tribute mining spreading to mines in other countries, including to the Alten Copper Mines, in Arctic Norway.
Advantages of tribute mining are that it is a form of profit sharing, encouraging productivity, and that the rights and obligations of the parties are subject to a specific written agreement that is enforceable. A potential disadvantage is that the tribute miners share the risk of the mining venture, such as downside variability of ore grade and the actual hours of work and other costs incurred during mining. A tributer needed skills, other than purely mining skills, to assess the likely value of production in the ground to be worked, under the tribute agreement, and to strike an appropriate deal on the share of production that is appropriate to the costs and effort of the mining work. Tributers may or may not have had to fund, in part or in full, processing of the ore, mining tools, mine timber, explosives, drills, candles and other consumables necessary for mining, or the tribute agreement may make such items the responsibility of the titleholder of the mine. Mining trade unions generally opposed tribute mining, preferring payments to miners to be in the form of hourly wages.
In Australia, tribute agreements fall within the jurisdiction of Warden's courts, which date from the period of the Australian gold rushes. Tribute agreements were defined and regulated under mining legislation. The arrangement commonly arose when the titleholder (in Australia, almost always a lessee) of a mine ceased working the mine, but agreed to let another party work the mine, usually on a smaller scale than previously. Usually, tribute miners would be former employees of a hitherto closed or partially-closed mine, with some existing knowledge of its ore body and its likely extent and strike and dip. However, sometimes specific areas of a working mine were given over to particular miners, who had been selected by management, to work on tribute in a mutually-beneficial arrangement. Tribute mining may be applied to any kind of mine but, in Australia, is especially pertinent to hard-rock mining, particularly gold mines but also mines for non-ferrous metallic minerals such as copper, tin, and silver-lead-zinc ores. In Western Australia, tributers had an industry organisation to represent their interests, the Prospectors and Tributers Association.
In Zimbabwe, tribute agreements became a mechanism for involving local artisanal miners in the production of chromite from mines owned by transnational companies.

A tuyere, or tuyère (French pronunciation: [tɥijɛʁ]; English: ), is a tube, nozzle or pipe allowing the blowing of air into a furnace or hearth.
Air or oxygen is injected into a hearth under pressure from bellows or a blowing engine or other devices. This causes the fire to become hotter in front of the blast than it would otherwise have been, enabling metals to be smelted or melted or made hot enough to be worked in a forge, though these are blown only with air. This applies to any process where a blast is delivered under pressure to make a fire hotter. Archeologists have discovered tuyeres dating from the Iron Age; one example dates from between 770 BCE and 515 BCE.
Following the introduction of hot blast, tuyeres are often water-cooled.
Around the year 1500 new ironmaking techniques, including the blast furnace and finery forge, were introduced into England from France, along with the French technical terms relating to the new technology. "Tuyere" (French: tuyère, lit. 'air vent') is one of these French words, sometimes Anglicised as tue-iron or tue iron.
Examples
A bloomery normally had one tuyere.
Early blast furnaces also had one tuyere, but were fed from bellows perhaps 12 feet (3.7m) long operated by a waterwheel. During the Industrial Revolution, the blast began to be provided using steam engines, initially Watt engines working blowing cylinders. Improvements in foundry practice enabled gas-tight cast iron pipes to be produced, enabling one engine to deliver blast to several sides of a furnace, through multiple tuyeres.
A finery forge contained finery and chafery hearths, usually one of the latter and one to three of the former. Each hearth was equipped with its own set of bellows, blowing into it through a tuyere.
The blacksmith's hearth at their forge has a tuyere, often blown by foot-operated bellows.
Tuyeres were also used in smelting lead and copper in smeltmills.
As of 2009 the world's largest blast furnace in Caofeidian, China operated by Shougang Jing Tang United Iron and Steel Ltd had 42 tuyeres, through which the hot blast is injected in the furnace. They are usually made from copper and cooled with a water jacket to withstand the extreme temperatures.

The Tybo Charcoal Kilns are a pair of charcoal kilns located 4 miles (6.4 km) north of Tybo, Nevada. Both kilns are 30 feet (9.1 m) tall and 25 feet (7.6 m) in diameter and were built from rocks and mud. The kilns each have three openings: a top opening, a door at ground level, and a rear window with a ramp for wood wagons. The kilns were among 15 built in 1874 for the Tybo Consolidated Company. The company, which mined the region's silver, used charcoal to fuel its smelting furnace. To acquire its fuel, it imported wood from nearby hills, which it then converted to charcoal in the kilns.
The kilns were built during a mining boom in the area around Tybo. Though the community had only been settled in 1870, by the end of the decade it had a post office, school, newspaper, and almost 1000 residents.
The kilns were added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 19, 1974.

Tyndall Stone is a registered trademark name by Gillis Quarries Ltd. Tyndall Stone is a dolomitic limestone that is quarried from the Selkirk Member of the Ordovician Red River Formation in the vicinity of Garson and Tyndall, Manitoba, Canada. It is a cream-coloured limestone with a pervasive mottling of darker dolomite. The mottling gives the rock a tapestry-like effect, and it is popular for use as a building and ornamental stone.
Tyndall Stone is highly fossiliferous and the fossils contribute to its aesthetic appeal. It contains numerous fossil gastropods, brachiopods, cephalopods, trilobites, corals, stromatoporoids, Receptaculites, and others. The mottling results from burrowing by marine creatures that occurred during and shortly after limestone deposition. The identity of the burrowing organisms is not known, but fossil burrows of this type have been given the name Thalassinoides.
Tyndall Stone was first used in 1832 for building Lower Fort Garry, and has since become popular for building purposes throughout Canada and the United States. The Canadian Parliament Buildings in Ottawa, Ontario, the Saskatchewan Legislative Building in Regina, Saskatchewan, the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, the Queen Elizabeth II Building in Edmonton, Alberta, the Canadian Museum of History in Gatineau, Quebec, the Manitoba Legislative Building in Winnipeg, Manitoba, the Banff Springs Hotel, the Empress Hotel in Victoria, British Columbia, the Appartements le Château in Montreal, Quebec and many others include Tyndall Stone in their construction.
The Tyndall Stone quarry is operated by Gillis Quarries Ltd. and is located approximately 40 kilometres northeast of Winnipeg, Manitoba. The quarry has been in operation, and owned by the same family, since 1910.
In 2023, Tyndall Stone was designated as a Global Heritage Stone Resource, the only one of Canadian origin.
Cultural reference
Author Carol Shields described Tyndall Stone in her Pulitzer Prize winning novel, The Stone Diaries.

Unión Minera del Norte, S.A., also known by its acronym UMINSA, is Spain's leading company in the coal mining sector, with operations in the mining basins of León, Palencia and Asturias. It is owned by the controversial businessman from León, Victorino Alonso, and its registered office is in Madrid. It has a production of more than 2,000,000 tons of coal per year and employs nearly 1,500 workers.
In 2018, the company went into liquidation.
History
Victorino Alonso's takeoff in the mining sector began when he acquired Minero Siderúrgica de Ponferrada in 1994, a company that was in technical bankruptcy and owned by Caja España, one of its creditors. Already in 1989, Alonso became a shareholder of Hullas de Barruelo, which exploited the coal mining area of the Rubagón region, in Barruelo de Santullán (Palencia).
In 1994, through its company Lexomosa, it absorbed Carbonia and Minas de Ventana, forming Carbones León Norte, S.A. (CARLENOR). In March 1998, CARLENOR changed its name to Unión Minera del Norte, S.A. (UMINSA) to acquire, three months later, Antracitas de Fabero, Antracitas de Brañuelas, Mina de Fontoria, Explotaciones Mineras de Caboalles, Minas Santa Leocadia and all of Hullas de Barruelo.
In 1999, it purchased almost the entire Palencia mining basin, formed at that time by Antracitas de Velilla, in Velilla del Río Carrión, Antracitas del Norte in Aviñante and Velilla de Tarilonte, Sociedad Minera San Luis de Guardo, Antracitas de San Claudio (which had closed its last subway mine a few months before) in Castrejón de la Peña and Antracitas de Montebismo in La Pernía. Only Carbones San Isidro, with a small operation in Velilla del Río Carrión, remained outside the domain of Victorino Alonso's group. By 2010, Alonso had closed all these exploitations, keeping only "Las Cuevas" pit in Velilla del Río Carrión and two open pit mines in Guardo and Castrejón de la Peña open, and employing only about 150 workers. In 2012 it announced the closure of the "Las Cuevas" pit, and the transfer of its 80 employees to Tinéu.
In the province of León, UMINSA absorbed Antracitas de Fabero in 1997 and Coto Minero del Sil in 2000, as well as the entire basin of the Laciana and Torre del Bierzo region, including operations such as Mina Mora Primera and Sociedad Santa Bárbara, both in the area of Piedrafita de Babia. Thus, in 2003, the company had 1,053 employees in the province of León. In 2010 it closed the San Miguel group in Laciana, significantly reducing the number of mining operations in this region of Leon. In 2011 it closed the Brañuelas mine in Torre del Bierzo, so that in El Bierzo, after the closure of the Santa Cruz group in Páramo del Sil in 2012 it only maintains the open pit of Fabero with 250 workers and the Salgueiro Group in Torre del Bierzo. In 2014 it only kept open in the Bierzo area the Salgueiro Group and the open pit Gran Corta de Fabero.
In 2003, the company acquired Coto Minero del Narcea and Antracitas de Tinéu in Asturias. In 2011, it closed Coto Narcea in Monasterio and Antisa in Tinéu, so in 2012 it only had the Pilotuerto mine in Tinéu. In 2014, only the Pilotuerto mine in Tinéu remains in operation. It also keeps some layers of the Cerredo inland mine owned by Minera AsturLeonesa in operation, although this agreement is in the process of being dissolved.
In 2010, UMINSA was the main private company in the mining sector in Spain, ahead of Coto Minero Cantábrico, which is also owned by Victorino Alonso and which arose in 2008 as a result of the merger of Minero Siderúrgica de Ponferrada and Hullas del Coto Cortés, with activity in the Asturian basin.
UMINSA has received from different sectors accusations of capturing its profits thanks to state aid to coal mining. In 2010, the company received 81.6 million euros in aid to the sector from the state.
In July 2013, the company entered voluntary insolvency proceedings, due to its high debt, and in 2018 into liquidation as a step prior to its dissolution.
Properties
UMINSA's annexes by province and year of acquisition are as follows:
Province of León
1998: Antracitas de Fabero, Antracitas de Brañuelas, Minera de Fontoria, Minas Santa Leocadia, Explotaciones Mineras Caboalles and Minas de Lumajo.
1999: Antracitas La Silva.
2000: Minera de Torre.
2002: Coto Minero del Sil, Mina Mora and Sociedad Santa Bárbara.
2003: Minas y Expl. Industriales, Carbones El Túnel, Industrias Carfema and Minas del Bierzo.
2004: Antracitas de La Granja, Antracitas de Arlanza, Adelina Mine and Los Compadres Mine.
2009: Campomanes Hermanos and Virgilio Riesco.
Province of Palencia
1998: Hullas de Barruelo
1999: Antracitas de Velilla, Sociedad Minera San Luis, Antracitas del Norte, Antracitas San Claudio and Antracitas de Montebismo.
Asturias
2004: Coto Minero del Narcea and Antracitas de Tinéu.
2008: González y Díez S.A. (Tinéu).
Controversy
UMINSA's methods have been criticized by both trade unions and environmental groups, due to the non-payment of the miners' salaries as a means of pressure to receive public funds on the one hand, and the exploitation of open-pit mines in protected areas in the provinces of León and Palencia on the other. In addition, Victorino Alonso's business network has aroused the suspicions of various groups, who maintain that his sole objective in leading the sector is to obtain state subsidies and to close the mines. Thus, in 1996 he was the subject of an investigation by the judicial police unit of the Guardia Civil which revealed possible fraud and an unjustified increase in assets, although the Ministry of Industry subsequently informed that it would not initiate investigations into his alleged irregularities.

An urban mine is the stockpile of rare metals in the discarded waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) of a society. Urban mining is the process of recovering these rare metals through mechanical and chemical treatments. In 1997, recycled gold accounted for approximately 20% of the 2700 tons of gold supplied to the market.
The name was coined in the 1980s by Professor Hideo Nanjyo of the Research Institute of Mineral Dressing and Metallurgy at Tohoku University and the idea has gained significant traction in Japan (and in other parts of Asia) in the 21st century.
In urban mining, the main motivation is recovery of materials while in "landfill mining" the goal is solving the problem at the disposal level.
In developing countries, people tend to recycle e-waste at informal sites, including inside homes, without the use of proper equipment and waste management techniques.
Research published by the Japanese government's National Institute of Materials Science in 2010 estimated that there were 6,800 tonnes of gold recoverable from used electronic equipment in Japan.
There is also an international assembly on reusing waste electronics to produce new electronic gadgets. The most recent assembly was held from 21st of May 2025 to 23rd of May in Procida, Italy

Urophagia is the consumption of urine. Urine was consumed in several ancient cultures for various health, healing, and cosmetic purposes. People have been known to drink urine in extreme cases of water scarcity; however numerous sources, including the US Army Field Manual, advise against it. Urine may also be consumed as a sexual activity.
Some male animals taste their female counterpart's urine to test fertility.
Human health warnings
The World Health Organization has found that the pathogens contained in urine rarely pose a health risk. However, it does caution that in areas where Schistosoma haematobium, a parasitic flatworm, is prevalent, it can be transmitted from person to person.
Humans
As food
Emergency survival techniques
Survival guides such as the US Army Field Manual, the SAS Survival Handbook, and others generally advise against drinking urine for survival. These guides state that drinking urine tends to worsen rather than relieve dehydration due to the salts in it, and that urine should not be consumed, even when no other fluid is available.
Aron Ralston drank urine when trapped for several days with his arm under a boulder. Survivalist television host Bear Grylls drank urine and encouraged others to do so on several episodes on his TV shows.
Medicine
Historically, doctors would taste patients' urine to test for diabetes mellitus. The sweet taste of the urine in diabetics was due to the presence of glucose in urine, as seen in hyperglycaemia.
Sexual activity
Folk medicine
In various cultures, alternative medicine can advocate the consumption of urine from various animals such as humans, camels, or cattle for medicinal or cosmetic purposes, but no evidence supports their use.
Forced
People may be forced to drink urine as a form of torture or humiliation, as in the case of a Dalit boy in Jaunpur, India, who in 2023 was accused by local youths of sexually harassing a girl.
Animals
Livestock
Giraffes
Male giraffes will nudge a female to make her urinate, then taste the urine to assess whether the female is fertile or not.
Dogs
Some dogs sniff their urine then taste it.

The Vinalhaven Galamander is a rare surviving example of a specialized stone-hauling vehicle in Vinalhaven, Maine. It is located in a small public park at the junction of Main, Atlantic, and School Streets in Vinalhaven's downtown area. Its wooden parts are a reproduction of original elements; its metal parts are original. The vehicle, a type used in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in the island's granite quarries, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1970.
Description and history
The Vinalhaven Galamander stands under a frame shelter in Bandstand Park, created by the intersection of Main, Atlantic, and School Streets in downtown Vinalhaven. Its frame consists of a single large wooden beam, with a fixed rear axle supported by two large spoked wheels. The front axle is mounted on a swivel to aid steering, and is supported by two small spoked wheels. The operator's seat is mounted at the center of the front axle, and a swiveling derrick is mounted on top of the rear axle. The vehicle would during operation have been drawn by a team of eight horses.
The construction date of this particular galamander is unknown, but it has long been a fixture of the town's landscape. These vehicles were in regular use during the heyday of Vinalhaven's granite quarries, which extended from 1880 to the onset of World War I in 1914. It stood for many years, exposed to the elements, in Bandstand Park. Its wooden elements having deteriorated, the wagon was rebuilt by the local historical society using new wood and the original metal fittings, and has been placed under a protective shelter.
The only known surviving galamander with original wooden elements is the Robertson Quarry Galamander in Franklin, Maine.

The Walker Charcoal Kiln is a structure in the Prescott National Forest near the town of Walker, Arizona and situated in the vicinity of the abandoned Poland Junction Mine near the summit of Renegade Hill. It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. A sign posted near the kiln reads, "This kiln was constructed around 1880 by Jake and Joe Carmichael to convert oak wood into charcoal for use at nearby smelters. The surrounding forest was cut so heavily for charcoal and mine props in the late 1800s that it is just now becoming productive again."

Ward Charcoal Ovens State Historic Park is an area designated for historic preservation and public recreation located 20 miles (32 km) south of the town of Ely in White Pine County, Nevada. The 700-acre (280 ha) state park protects beehive-shaped charcoal ovens constructed in the latter half of the 19th century.
History
Ovens
The charcoal ovens are associated with the silver mining ghost town of Ward, Nevada, established in 1876. The town at its peak had a population of 1500, two newspapers, a school, a fire department, two smelters, and a stamp mill. The town declined after 1880, with a fire in 1883 destroying a third of the town. The post office closed in 1888. Mining revived briefly in the 1930s and 1960s. The town has been mostly destroyed by repeated flash flooding due to its low-lying site. Only the smelter, mill foundations, and cemetery are left.
The charcoal ovens are two miles to the south of the townsite. Six large ovens remain in excellent repair, 30 feet (9.1 m) high, 27 feet (8.2 m) in diameter, with walls 2 feet (0.61 m) thick at the base. The ovens were in operation from 1876 through 1879. They were built of quartz latite welded tuff by itinerant Swiss Italian masons known as carbonari, who specialized in the ovens. The beehive shape was designed as a more efficient version of the open-pit system that originated in Italy. The charcoal ovens prepared charcoal from locally harvested timber for use in the smelters at Ward, using 30 to 60 bushels of charcoal per ton of ore, for 16,000 bushels (563,840 liters) a day. The Ward ovens are the best-preserved of their kind in Nevada. They were listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1971.
Park
The area was under private ownership and management until 1956 when the Nevada State Park Commission was offered a permit to protect the ovens. Two privately owned parcels were transferred to the Nevada Department of Wildlife in 1968; and in 1969, 160 acres (64.8 ha) were transferred to the state park system to create a state monument. The area was designated a state park in 1994 when recreational facilities were added.
Activities and amenities
The park offers camping, picnicking, and hiking and mountain biking trails.

Wattle and daub is a composite building method in which a woven lattice of wooden strips called "wattle" is "daubed" with a sticky material usually made of some combination of wet soil, clay, sand, and straw. Wattle and daub has been used for at least 6,000 years and is still an important construction method in many parts of the world. Many historic buildings include wattle and daub construction.
History
The wattle and daub technique has been used since the Neolithic period. It was common for houses of Linear pottery and Rössen cultures of middle Europe, but is also found in Western Asia (Çatalhöyük, Shillourokambos) as well as in North America (Mississippian culture) and South America (Brazil). In Africa it is common in the architecture of traditional houses such as those of the Ashanti people. Its usage dates back at least 6,000 years. There are suggestions that construction techniques such as lath and plaster and even cob may have evolved from wattle and daub. Fragments from prehistoric wattle and daub buildings have been found in Africa, Europe, Mesoamerica and North America.
Evidence for wattle and daub (or "wattle and reed") fire pits, storage bins, and buildings shows up in Egyptian archaeological sites such as Merimda and El Omari, dating back to the 5th millennium BCE, predating the use of mud brick and continuing to be the preferred building material until about the start of the First Dynasty (3100BCE). It continued to flourish well into the New Kingdom and beyond. Vitruvius refers to it as being employed in Rome. A review of English architecture especially reveals that the sophistication of this craft is dependent on the various styles of timber frame housing.
The wattle and plaster process has been replaced in modern architecture by brick and mortar or by lath and plaster, a common building material for wall and ceiling surfaces, in which a series of nailed wooden strips are covered with plaster smoothed into a flat surface. In many regions this building method has itself been overtaken by drywall construction using plasterboard sheets.
Wattle
The wattle is made by weaving thin branches (either whole, or more usually split) or slats between upright stakes. The wattle may be made as loose panels, slotted between timber framing to make infill panels, or made in place to form the whole of a wall. In different regions, the material of wattle can be different. For example, at the Mitchell Site on the northern outskirts of the city of Mitchell, South Dakota, willow has been found as the wattle material of the walls of the house. Reeds and vines can also be used as wattle material. The origin of the term wattle describing a group of acacias in Australia, is derived from the common use of acacias as wattle in early Australian European settlements.
Daub
Daub is usually created from a mixture of ingredients from three categories: binders, aggregates and reinforcement. Binders hold the mix together and can include clay, lime, chalk dust and limestone dust. Aggregates give the mix its bulk and dimensional stability through materials such as mud, sand, crushed chalk and crushed stone. Reinforcement is provided by straw, hair, hay or other fibrous materials, and helps to hold the mix together as well as to control shrinkage and provide flexibility. The daub may be mixed by hand, or by treading – either by humans or livestock. It is then applied to the wattle and allowed to dry, and often then whitewashed to increase its resistance to rain. Sometimes there can be more than one layer of daub. At the Mitchell Site, the anterior of the house had double layers of burned daub.
Styles of infill panels
There were two popular choices for wattle and daub infill paneling: close-studded paneling and square paneling.
Close-studding
Close-studding panels create a much narrower space between the timbers: anywhere from 7 to 16 inches (18 to 40 cm). For this style of panel, weaving is too difficult, so the wattles run horizontally and are known as ledgers. The ledgers are sprung into each upright timber (stud) through a system of augered holes on one side and short chiseled grooves along the other. The holes (along with holes of square paneling) are drilled at a slight angle towards the outer face of each stud. This allows room for upright hazels to be tied to ledgers from the inside of the building. The horizontal ledgers are placed every two to three feet (0.6 to 0.9 metres) with whole hazel rods positioned upright top to bottom and lashed to the ledgers. These hazel rods are generally tied a finger-width apart with 6–8 rods each with a 16-inch (40 cm) width. Gaps allow key formation for drying.
Square panels
Square panels are large, wide panels typical of some later timber-frame houses. These panels may be square in shape, or sometimes triangular to accommodate arched or decorative bracing. This style requires the wattles to be woven for better support of the daub.
To insert wattles in a square panel several steps are required. First, a series of evenly spaced holes are drilled along the middle of the inner face of each upper timber. Next, a continuous groove is cut along the middle of each inner face of the lower timber in each panel. Vertical slender timbers, known as staves, are then inserted and these hold the whole panel within the timber frame. The staves are positioned into the holes and then sprung into the grooves. They must be placed with sufficient gaps to weave the flexible horizontal wattles.
Applications
In some places or cultures, the technique of wattle and daub was used with different materials and thus has different names.
Pug and pine
In the early days of the colonisation of South Australia, in areas where substantial timber was unavailable, pioneers' cottages and other small buildings were frequently constructed with light vertical timbers, which may have been "native pine" (Callitris or Casuarina spp.), driven into the ground, the gaps being stopped with pug (kneaded clay and grass mixture). Another term for this construction is palisade and pug.
Mud and stud
"Mud and stud" is a similar process to wattle and daub, with a simple frame consisting only of upright studs joined by cross rails at the tops and bottoms. Thin staves of ash were attached, then daubed with a mixture of mud, straw, hair and dung. The style of building was once common in Lincolnshire.
Pierrotage, columbage
Pierrotage is the infilling material used in French Vernacular architecture of the Southern United States to infill between half-timbering with diagonal braces, which is similar to daub. It is usually made of lime mortar clay mixed with small stones. It is also called bousillage or bouzillage, especially in French Vernacular architecture of Louisiana of the early 1700s. The materials of bousillage are Spanish moss or clay and grass. Bousillage also refers to the type of brick molded with the same materials and used as infilling between posts. Columbage refers to the timber-framed construction with diagonal bracing of the framework. Pierratage or bousillage is the material filled into the structural timbers.
Bajarreque
Bajarreque is a wall constructed with the technique of wattle and daub. The wattle here is made of bagasse, and the daub is the mix of clay and straw.
Jacal
Jacal can refer to a type of crude house whose wall is built with wattle and daub in southwestern US. Closely spaced upright sticks or poles driven into the ground with small branches (wattle) interwoven between them make the structural frame of the wall. Mud or an adobe clay (daub) is covered outside. To provide additional weather protection, the wall is usually plastered.

Weathertex is a wood-based fibrous product manufactured from compressed hardwood timber fibres, mostly from eucalyptus species.
It is produced only in Australia and used as an external wall cladding and siding, and as weatherboard material in residential and commercial constructions.
History
This product was initially produced by the wood company, Weathertex Pty Ltd, in Australia in 1939.
Later, that producing company was renamed as Weathertex Australia, and since 2020, the Australian mechanical engineer, Jason O'Hagan, is the managing director of the factory.
Product overview
Typically, such wood-based panels are composed of approximately 97% hardwood timber and 3% natural wax, and are produced without the use of synthetic adhesives or added binders. The material relies on the natural lignin in wood to bind fibres during manufacture. This type of adhesion is called, auto-adhesion.
The product is made by processing hardwood into fibres through explosion (Mason guns at 100 psi). Then, brown-coloured wet fibres are subjected to steam and heat, and to a high pressure to form extremely dense fibreboards. Natural wax is added in order to improve water resistance and decrease moisture absorption.
Some reported technical features of the composite include:
No added glues, resins or formaldehyde-based binders.
Resistance to rot, splitting and cracking.
Termite resistance due to removal of sugars and starches during processing.
Lightweight panels that can be cut with standard woodworking tools.
This green product (GreenTag EPD™), is primarily used for external cladding systems, including weatherboards and architectural panels.

Whindust is a local name used in Scotland and the North of England referring to fine-grained grit or dust resulting as a by-product from the grinding and breaking of whinstone.
Whindust is available in several forms, washed whindust, damp whindust and whindust.
The principal uses of the aggregate are for creating a low-cost firm base under landscaping features. Typically the dust would be applied over a foundation layer of heavier rubble. The dust is of a very hard igneous rock so does not break down into sand, yet it does pack into a very solid form. This makes the product ideal for slabbing and driveways.

Whinstone is a term used in the quarrying industry to describe any hard dark-coloured rock. Examples include the igneous rocks, basalt and dolerite, as well as the sedimentary rock chert.
Etymology
The Northern English/Scots term whin is first attested in the fourteenth century, and the compound whinstone from the sixteenth. The Oxford English Dictionary concludes that the etymology of whin is obscure, though it has been claimed, fancifully, that the term 'whin' derives from the sound it makes when struck with a hammer.
Description
Massive outcrops of whinstone occur at the Pentland Hills, Scotland and the Whin Sills, England.
It is used for road chippings and dry stone walls, but its natural angular shapes do not fit together well and are not easy to build with, and its hardness makes it a difficult material to work. A common use is in the laying of patios and driveways in its ground/by product state called Whindust.

The Wolfsegg Iron, also known as the Salzburg Cube, is a small cuboid mass of iron that was found buried in Tertiary lignite in Wolfsegg am Hausruck, Austria, in 1885. It weighs 785 grams (1 lb 12 oz) and measures 67 mm × 67 mm × 47 mm (2¾" x 2¾" x 1¾"). Four of its sides are roughly flat, while the two remaining sides (opposite each other) are convex. A fairly deep groove is incised all the way around the object, about mid-way up its height.
The Wolfsegg Iron became notable when it was claimed to be an out-of-place artifact: a worked iron cube found buried in a 20-million-year-old coal seam. It was originally identified by scientists as being of meteoric origin, a suggestion later ruled out by analysis. It seems most likely that it is a piece of cast iron used as ballast in mining machinery, deposited during mining efforts before it was found apparently within the seam.
History
Early descriptions of the object appeared in contemporary editions of the scientific journals Nature and L'Astronomie, the object identified by scientists as being a fossil meteorite. It was reported that the object was discovered when a workman at the Braun iron foundry in Schöndorf, Austria, was breaking up a block of lignite that had been mined at Wolfsegg. In 1886, mining engineer Adolf Gurlt reported on the object to the Natural History Society of Bonn, noting that the object was coated with a thin layer of rust, was made of iron, and had a specific gravity of 7.75.
A plaster cast was made of the object shortly before the end of the 19th century, as the original had suffered from being handled, and had had samples cut from it by researchers.
Analysis
The object was analysed in 1966–1967 by the Vienna Naturhistorisches Museum using electron beam micro-analysis, which found no traces of nickel, chromium or cobalt in the iron, suggesting that it was not of meteoric origin, while the lack of sulfur indicated that it is not a pyrite. Because of its low magnesium content, Dr. Gero Kurat of the museum and Dr. Rudolf Grill of the Federal Geological Office in Vienna thought that it might be cast iron, Grill suggesting that similar rough lumps had been used as ballast in early mining machinery.
The cast is currently kept in the Oberösterreichischen Landesmuseen in Linz, Austria, where the original object was also exhibited from 1950 to 1958, while the original cuboid is held by the Heimathaus Museum of Vöcklabruck, Austria.
Out-of-place artifact
The Wolfsegg Iron is claimed by some as an out-of-place artifact (OOPArt), and it is often stated as a fact in paranormal literature that it disappeared without trace in 1910, from the Salzburg Museum. In fact, as mentioned, it is at the Heimathaus Museum in Vöcklabruck, Austria, which is where the photo was taken. It has also erroneously been described as "a perfectly machined steel cube".

Wood is a structural tissue/material found as xylem in the stems and roots of trees and other woody plants. Being a natural material, it is characterized as an organic material – a natural composite of cellulosic fibers that are strong in tension and embedded in a matrix of lignin and hemicelluloses that resists compression.
Wood is sometimes defined as only the secondary xylem in the stems of trees, or more broadly to include the same type of tissue elsewhere, such as in the roots of trees or shrubs. In a living tree, it performs a mechanical-support function, enabling woody plants to grow large or to stand up by themselves. It also conveys water and nutrients among the leaves, other growing tissues, and the roots. Wood may also refer to other plant materials with comparable properties, and to material engineered from wood, woodchips, or fibers.
Wood has been used for thousands of years for fuel, as a construction material, for making tools and weapons, furniture and paper. More recently it emerged as a feedstock for the production of purified cellulose and its derivatives, such as cellophane and cellulose acetate.
As of 2020, the growing stock of forests worldwide was about 557 billion cubic meters. As an abundant, carbon-neutral renewable resource, woody materials have been of intense interest as a source of renewable energy. In 2023, almost 4 billion cubic meters of wood were harvested. Dominant uses were for furniture and building construction.
Wood is scientifically studied and researched through the discipline of wood science, which was initiated since the beginning of the 20th century.
History
A 2011 discovery in the Canadian province of New Brunswick yielded the earliest known plants to have grown wood, approximately 395 to 400 million years ago.
Wood can be dated by carbon dating and in some species by dendrochronology to determine when a wooden object was created.
People have used wood for thousands of years for many purposes, including as a fuel or as a construction material for making houses, tools, weapons, furniture, packaging, artworks, and paper. Known constructions using wood date back ten thousand years. Buildings like the longhouses in Neolithic Europe were made primarily of wood.
Recent use of wood has been enhanced by the addition of steel and bronze into construction.
The year-to-year variation in tree-ring widths and isotopic abundances gives clues to the prevailing climate at the time a tree was cut.
Early humans progressively invented tools and techniques for trapping animals. The earliest spears were crafted from wood, with tips toughened by burning. By 15,000 BC, hunters employed wooden and bone spear-launchers to enhance force and distance. These devices were frequently adorned with carvings of creatures.
Physical properties
Growth rings
Wood, in the strict sense, is yielded by trees, which increase in diameter by the formation, between the existing wood and the inner bark, of new woody layers which envelop the entire stem, living branches, and roots. This process is known as secondary growth; it is the result of cell division in the vascular cambium, a lateral meristem, and subsequent expansion of the new cells. These cells then go on to form thickened secondary cell walls, composed mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin.
Where the differences between the seasons are distinct, e.g. New Zealand, growth can occur in a discrete annual or seasonal pattern, leading to growth rings; these can usually be most clearly seen on the end of a log, but are also visible on the other surfaces. If the distinctiveness between seasons is annual (as is the case in equatorial regions, e.g. Singapore), these growth rings are referred to as annual rings. Where there is little seasonal difference growth rings are likely to be indistinct or absent. If the bark of the tree has been removed in a particular area, the rings will likely be deformed as the plant overgrows the scar.
If there are differences within a growth ring, then the part of a growth ring nearest the center of the tree, and formed early in the growing season when growth is rapid, is usually composed of wider elements. It is usually lighter in color than that near the outer portion of the ring, and is known as earlywood or springwood. The outer portion formed later in the season is then known as the latewood or summerwood. There are major differences, depending on the kind of wood. If a tree grows all its life in the open and the conditions of soil and site remain unchanged, it will make its most rapid growth in youth, and gradually decline. The annual rings of growth are for many years quite wide, but later they become narrower and narrower. Since each succeeding ring is laid down on the outside of the wood previously formed, it follows that unless a tree materially increases its production of wood from year to year, the rings must necessarily become thinner as the trunk gets wider. As a tree reaches maturity its crown becomes more open and the annual wood production is lessened, thereby reducing still more the width of the growth rings. In the case of forest-grown trees so much depends upon the competition of the trees in their struggle for light and nourishment that periods of rapid and slow growth may alternate. Some trees, such as southern oaks, maintain the same width of ring for hundreds of years. On the whole, as a tree gets larger in diameter the width of the growth rings decreases.
Knots
As a tree grows, lower branches often die, and their bases may become overgrown and enclosed by subsequent layers of trunk wood, forming a type of imperfection known as a knot. The dead branch may not be attached to the trunk wood except at its base and can drop out after the tree has been sawn into boards. Knots affect the technical properties of the wood, usually reducing tension strength, but may be exploited for visual effect. In a longitudinally sawn plank, a knot will appear as a roughly circular "solid" (usually darker) piece of wood around which the grain of the rest of the wood "flows" (parts and rejoins). Within a knot, the direction of the wood (grain direction) is up to 90 degrees different from the grain direction of the regular wood.
In the tree a knot is either the base of a side branch or a dormant bud. A knot (when the base of a side branch) is conical in shape (hence the roughly circular cross-section) with the inner tip at the point in stem diameter at which the plant's vascular cambium was located when the branch formed as a bud.
In grading lumber and structural timber, knots are classified according to their form, size, soundness, and the firmness with which they are held in place. This firmness is affected by, among other factors, the length of time for which the branch was dead while the attaching stem continued to grow.
Knots materially affect cracking and warping, ease in working, and cleavability of timber. They are defects which weaken timber and lower its value for structural purposes where strength is an important consideration. The weakening effect is much more serious when timber is subjected to forces perpendicular to the grain and/or tension than when under load along the grain and/or compression. The extent to which knots affect the strength of a beam depends upon their position, size, number, and condition. A knot on the upper side is compressed, while one on the lower side is subjected to tension. If there is a season check in the knot, as is often the case, it will offer little resistance to this tensile stress. Small knots may be located along the neutral plane of a beam and increase the strength by preventing longitudinal shearing. Knots in a board or plank are least injurious when they extend through it at right angles to its broadest surface. Knots which occur near the ends of a beam do not weaken it. Sound knots which occur in the central portion one-fourth the height of the beam from either edge are not serious defects.
Knots do not necessarily influence the stiffness of structural timber; this will depend on the size and location. Stiffness and elastic strength are more dependent upon the sound wood than upon localized defects. The breaking strength is very susceptible to defects. Sound knots do not weaken wood when subject to compression parallel to the grain.
In some decorative applications, wood with knots may be desirable to add visual interest. In applications where wood is painted, such as skirting boards, fascia boards, door frames and furniture, resins present in the timber may continue to 'bleed' through to the surface of a knot for months or even years after manufacture and show as a yellow or brownish stain. A knot primer paint or solution (knotting), correctly applied during preparation, may do much to reduce this problem but it is difficult to control completely, especially when using mass-produced kiln-dried timber stocks.
Heartwood and sapwood
Heartwood (or duramen) is wood that as a result of a naturally occurring chemical transformation has become more resistant to decay. Heartwood formation is a genetically programmed process that occurs spontaneously. Some uncertainty exists as to whether the wood dies during heartwood formation, as it can still chemically react to decay organisms, but only once.
The term heartwood derives solely from its position and not from any vital importance to the tree. This is evidenced by the fact that a tree can thrive with its heart completely decayed. Some species begin to form heartwood very early in life, so having only a thin layer of live sapwood, while in others the change comes slowly. Thin sapwood is characteristic of such species as chestnut, black locust, mulberry, osage-orange, and sassafras, while in maple, ash, hickory, hackberry, beech, and pine, thick sapwood is the rule. Some others never form heartwood.
Heartwood is often visually distinct from the living sapwood and can be distinguished in a cross-section where the boundary will tend to follow the growth rings. For example, it is sometimes much darker. Other processes such as decay or insect invasion can also discolor wood, even in woody plants that do not form heartwood, which may lead to confusion.
Sapwood (or alburnum) is the younger, outermost wood; in the growing tree it is living wood, and its principal functions are to conduct water from the roots to the leaves and to store up and give back according to the season the reserves prepared in the leaves. By the time they become competent to conduct water, all xylem tracheids and vessels have lost their cytoplasm and the cells are therefore functionally dead. All wood in a tree is first formed as sapwood. The more leaves a tree bears and the more vigorous its growth, the larger the volume of sapwood required. Hence trees making rapid growth in the open have thicker sapwood for their size than trees of the same species growing in dense forests. Sometimes trees (of species that do form heartwood) grown in the open may become of considerable size, 30 cm (12 in) or more in diameter, before any heartwood begins to form, for example, in second growth hickory, or open-grown pines.
No definite relation exists between the annual rings of growth and the amount of sapwood. Within the same species the cross-sectional area of the sapwood is very roughly proportional to the size of the crown of the tree. If the rings are narrow, more of them are required than where they are wide. As the tree gets larger, the sapwood must necessarily become thinner or increase materially in volume. Sapwood is relatively thicker in the upper portion of the trunk of a tree than near the base, because the age and the diameter of the upper sections are less.
When a tree is very young it is covered with limbs almost, if not entirely, to the ground, but as it grows older some or all of them will eventually die and are either broken off or fall off. Subsequent growth of wood may completely conceal the stubs which will remain as knots. No matter how smooth and clear a log is on the outside, it is more or less knotty near the middle. Consequently, the sapwood of an old tree, and particularly of a forest-grown tree, will be freer from knots than the inner heartwood. Since in most uses of wood, knots are defects that weaken the timber and interfere with its ease of working and other properties, it follows that a given piece of sapwood, because of its position in the tree, may well be stronger than a piece of heartwood from the same tree.
Different pieces of wood cut from a large tree may differ decidedly, particularly if the tree is big and mature. In some trees, the wood laid on late in the life of a tree is softer, lighter, weaker, and more even textured than that produced earlier, but in other trees, the reverse applies. This may or may not correspond to heartwood and sapwood. In a large log the sapwood, because of the time in the life of the tree when it was grown, may be inferior in hardness, strength, and toughness to equally sound heartwood from the same log. In a smaller tree, the reverse may be true.
Color
In species which show a distinct difference between heartwood and sapwood the natural color of heartwood is usually darker than that of the sapwood, and very frequently the contrast is conspicuous (see section of yew log above). This is produced by deposits in the heartwood of chemical substances, so that a dramatic color variation does not imply a significant difference in the mechanical properties of heartwood and sapwood, although there may be a marked biochemical difference between the two.
Some experiments on very resinous longleaf pine specimens indicate an increase in strength, due to the resin which increases the strength when dry. Such resin-saturated heartwood is called "fat lighter". Structures built of fat lighter are almost impervious to rot and termites, and very flammable. Tree stumps of old longleaf pines are often dug, split into small pieces and sold as kindling for fires. Stumps thus dug may actually remain a century or more since being cut. Spruce impregnated with crude resin and dried is also greatly increased in strength thereby.
Since the latewood of a growth ring is usually darker in color than the earlywood, this fact may be used in visually judging the density, and therefore the hardness and strength of the material. This is particularly the case with coniferous woods. In ring-porous woods the vessels of the early wood often appear on a finished surface as darker than the denser latewood, though on cross sections of heartwood the reverse is commonly true. Otherwise the color of wood is no indication of strength.
Abnormal discoloration of wood often denotes a diseased condition, indicating unsoundness. The black check in western hemlock is the result of insect attacks. The reddish-brown streaks so common in hickory and certain other woods are mostly the result of injury by birds. The discoloration is merely an indication of an injury, and in all probability does not of itself affect the properties of the wood. Certain rot-producing fungi impart to wood characteristic colors which thus become symptomatic of weakness. Ordinary sap-staining is due to fungal growth, but does not necessarily produce a weakening effect.
Water content
Water occurs in living wood in three locations, namely:
in the cell walls
in the protoplasmic contents of the cells
as free water in the cell cavities and spaces, especially of the xylem
In heartwood it occurs only in the first and last forms. Wood that is thoroughly air-dried (in equilibrium with the moisture content of the air) retains 8–16% of the water in the cell walls, and none, or practically none, in the other forms. Even oven-dried wood retains a small percentage of moisture, but for all except chemical purposes, may be considered absolutely dry.
The general effect of the water content upon the wood substance is to render it softer and more pliable. A similar effect occurs in the softening action of water on rawhide, paper, or cloth. Within certain limits, the greater the water content, the greater its softening effect. The moisture in wood can be measured by several different moisture meters.
Drying produces a decided increase in the strength of wood, particularly in small specimens. An extreme example is the case of a completely dry spruce block 5 cm in section, which will sustain a permanent load four times as great as a green (undried) block of the same size will.
The greatest strength increase due to drying is in the ultimate crushing strength, and strength at elastic limit in endwise compression; these are followed by the modulus of rupture, and stress at elastic limit in cross-bending, while the modulus of elasticity is least affected.
Structure
Wood is a heterogeneous, hygroscopic, cellular and anisotropic (or more specifically, orthotropic) material. It consists of cells, and the cell walls are composed of micro-fibrils of cellulose (40–50%) and hemicellulose (15–25%) impregnated with lignin (15–30%).
In coniferous or softwood species the wood cells are mostly of one kind, tracheids, and as a result the material is much more uniform in structure than that of most hardwoods. There are no vessels ("pores") in coniferous wood such as one sees so prominently in oak and ash, for example.
The structure of hardwoods is more complex. The water conducting capability is mostly taken care of by vessels: in some cases (oak, chestnut, ash) these are quite large and distinct, in others (buckeye, poplar, willow) too small to be seen without a hand lens. In discussing such woods it is customary to divide them into two large classes, ring-porous and diffuse-porous.
In ring-porous species, such as ash, black locust, catalpa, chestnut, elm, hickory, mulberry, and oak, the larger vessels or pores (as cross sections of vessels are called) are localized in the part of the growth ring formed in spring, thus forming a region of more or less open and porous tissue. The rest of the ring, produced in summer, is made up of smaller vessels and a much greater proportion of wood fibers. These fibers are the elements which give strength and toughness to wood, while the vessels are a source of weakness.
In diffuse-porous woods the pores are evenly sized so that the water conducting capability is scattered throughout the growth ring instead of being collected in a band or row. Examples of this kind of wood are alder, basswood, birch, buckeye, maple, willow, and the Populus species such as aspen, cottonwood and poplar. Some species, such as walnut and cherry, are on the border between the two classes, forming an intermediate group.
Earlywood and latewood
In softwood
In temperate softwoods, there often is a marked difference between latewood and earlywood. The latewood will be denser than that formed early in the season. When examined under a microscope, the cells of dense latewood are seen to be very thick-walled and with very small cell cavities, while those formed first in the season have thin walls and large cell cavities. The strength is in the walls, not the cavities. Hence the greater the proportion of latewood, the greater the density and strength. In choosing a piece of pine where strength or stiffness is the important consideration, the principal thing to observe is the comparative amounts of earlywood and latewood. The width of ring is not nearly so important as the proportion and nature of the latewood in the ring.
If a heavy piece of pine is compared with a lightweight piece it will be seen at once that the heavier one contains a larger proportion of latewood than the other, and is therefore showing more clearly demarcated growth rings. In white pines there is not much contrast between the different parts of the ring, and as a result the wood is very uniform in texture and is easy to work. In hard pines, on the other hand, the latewood is very dense and is deep-colored, presenting a very decided contrast to the soft, straw-colored earlywood.
It is not only the proportion of latewood, but also its quality, that counts. In specimens that show a very large proportion of latewood it may be noticeably more porous and weigh considerably less than the latewood in pieces that contain less latewood. One can judge comparative density, and therefore to some extent strength, by visual inspection.
No satisfactory explanation can as yet be given for the exact mechanisms determining the formation of earlywood and latewood. Several factors may be involved. In conifers, at least, rate of growth alone does not determine the proportion of the two portions of the ring, for in some cases the wood of slow growth is very hard and heavy, while in others the opposite is true. The quality of the site where the tree grows undoubtedly affects the character of the wood formed, though it is not possible to formulate a rule governing it. In general, where strength or ease of working is essential, woods of moderate to slow growth should be chosen.
In ring-porous woods
In ring-porous woods, each season's growth is always well defined, because the large pores formed early in the season abut on the denser tissue of the year before.
In the case of the ring-porous hardwoods, there seems to exist a pretty definite relation between the rate of growth of timber and its properties. This may be briefly summed up in the general statement that the more rapid the growth or the wider the rings of growth, the heavier, harder, stronger, and stiffer the wood. This, it must be remembered, applies only to ring-porous woods such as oak, ash, hickory, and others of the same group, and is, of course, subject to some exceptions and limitations.
In ring-porous woods of good growth, it is usually the latewood in which the thick-walled, strength-giving fibers are most abundant. As the breadth of ring diminishes, this latewood is reduced so that very slow growth produces comparatively light, porous wood composed of thin-walled vessels and wood parenchyma. In good oak, these large vessels of the earlywood occupy from six to ten percent of the volume of the log, while in inferior material they may make up 25% or more. The latewood of good oak is dark colored and firm, and consists mostly of thick-walled fibers which form one-half or more of the wood. In inferior oak, this latewood is much reduced both in quantity and quality. Such variation is very largely the result of rate of growth.
Wide-ringed wood is often called "second-growth", because the growth of the young timber in open stands after the old trees have been removed is more rapid than in trees in a closed forest, and in the manufacture of articles where strength is an important consideration such "second-growth" hardwood material is preferred. This is particularly the case in the choice of hickory for handles and spokes. Here not only strength, but toughness and resilience are important.
The results of a series of tests on hickory by the U.S. Forest Service show that:
"The work or shock-resisting ability is greatest in wide-ringed wood that has from 5 to 14 rings per inch (rings 1.8-5 mm thick), is fairly constant from 14 to 38 rings per inch (rings 0.7–1.8 mm thick), and decreases rapidly from 38 to 47 rings per inch (rings 0.5–0.7 mm thick). The strength at maximum load is not so great with the most rapid-growing wood; it is maximum with from 14 to 20 rings per inch (rings 1.3–1.8 mm thick), and again becomes less as the wood becomes more closely ringed. The natural deduction is that wood of first-class mechanical value shows from 5 to 20 rings per inch (rings 1.3–5 mm thick) and that slower growth yields poorer stock. Thus the inspector or buyer of hickory should discriminate against timber that has more than 20 rings per inch (rings less than 1.3 mm thick). Exceptions exist, however, in the case of normal growth upon dry situations, in which the slow-growing material may be strong and tough."
The effect of rate of growth on the qualities of chestnut wood is summarized by the same authority as follows:
"When the rings are wide, the transition from spring wood to summer wood is gradual, while in the narrow rings the spring wood passes into summer wood abruptly. The width of the spring wood changes but little with the width of the annual ring, so that the narrowing or broadening of the annual ring is always at the expense of the summer wood. The narrow vessels of the summer wood make it richer in wood substance than the spring wood composed of wide vessels. Therefore, rapid-growing specimens with wide rings have more wood substance than slow-growing trees with narrow rings. Since the more the wood substance the greater the weight, and the greater the weight the stronger the wood, chestnuts with wide rings must have stronger wood than chestnuts with narrow rings. This agrees with the accepted view that sprouts (which always have wide rings) yield better and stronger wood than seedling chestnuts, which grow more slowly in diameter."
In diffuse-porous woods
In the diffuse-porous woods, the demarcation between rings is not always so clear and in some cases is almost (if not entirely) invisible to the unaided eye. Conversely, when there is a clear demarcation there may not be a noticeable difference in structure within the growth ring.
In diffuse-porous woods, as has been stated, the vessels or pores are even-sized, so that the water conducting capability is scattered throughout the ring instead of collected in the earlywood. The effect of rate of growth is, therefore, not the same as in the ring-porous woods, approaching more nearly the conditions in the conifers. In general, it may be stated that such woods of medium growth afford stronger material than when very rapidly or very slowly grown. In many uses of wood, total strength is not the main consideration. If ease of working is prized, wood should be chosen with regard to its uniformity of texture and straightness of grain, which will in most cases occur when there is little contrast between the latewood of one season's growth and the earlywood of the next.
Monocots
Structural material that resembles ordinary, "dicot" or conifer timber in its gross handling characteristics is produced by a number of monocot plants, and these also are colloquially called wood. Of these, bamboo, botanically a member of the grass family, has considerable economic importance, larger culms being widely used as a building and construction material and in the manufacture of engineered flooring, panels and veneer. Another major plant group that produces material that often is called wood are the palms. Of much less importance are plants such as Pandanus, Dracaena and Cordyline. With all this material, the structure and composition of the processed raw material is quite different from ordinary wood.
Specific gravity
The single most revealing property of wood as an indicator of wood quality is specific gravity (Timell 1986), as both pulp yield and lumber strength are determined by it. Specific gravity is the ratio of the mass of a substance to the mass of an equal volume of water; density is the ratio of a mass of a quantity of a substance to the volume of that quantity and is expressed in mass per unit substance, e.g., grams per milliliter (g/cm3 or g/ml). The terms are essentially equivalent as long as the metric system is used. Upon drying, wood shrinks and its density increases. Minimum values are associated with green (water-saturated) wood and are referred to as basic specific gravity (Timell 1986).
The U.S. Forest Products Laboratory lists a variety of ways to define specific gravity (G) and density (ρ) for wood:
The FPL has adopted Gb and G12 for specific gravity, in accordance with the ASTM D2555 standard. These are scientifically useful, but don't represent any condition that could physically occur. The FPL Wood Handbook also provides formulas for approximately converting any of these measurements to any other.
Density
Wood density is determined by multiple growth and physiological factors compounded into "one fairly easily measured wood characteristic" (Elliott 1970).
Age, diameter, height, radial (trunk) growth, geographical location, site and growing conditions, silvicultural treatment, and seed source all to some degree influence wood density. Variation is to be expected. The USDA Forest Service measured a coefficient of variation for the specific gravity of wood as 10%. In other words, about 68% (a standard deviation) of samples will fall within ±10% of the average specific gravity for a given species. Within an individual tree, the variation in wood density is often as great as or even greater than that between different trees (Timell 1986). Variation of specific gravity within the bole of a tree can occur in either the horizontal or vertical direction.
Because the specific gravity as defined above uses an unrealistic condition, woodworkers tend to use the "average dried weight", which is a density based on mass at 12% moisture content and volume at the same (ρ12). This condition occurs when the wood is at equilibrium moisture content with air at about 65% relative humidity and temperature at 30 °C (86 °F). This density is expressed in units of kg/m3 or lbs/ft3. If you know the specific gravity at 12% MC, G12 (from the Wood Handbook), then multiply by 1120 to get the average dried weight at 12% MC, ρ12, in kg/m3. For example, if G12 is 0.40, then average dried weight is ρ12 = 0.40 * 1120 = 448 kg/m3. You can also find values for dried weight in two other FPL publications, Hardwoods of North America and Softwoods of North America.
Tables
The following tables list the mechanical properties of wood and lumber plant species, including bamboo. See also Mechanical properties of tonewoods for additional properties.
Wood properties:
Bamboo properties:
Hard versus soft
It is common to classify wood as either softwood or hardwood. The wood from conifers (e.g. pine) is called softwood, and the wood from dicotyledons (usually broad-leaved trees, e.g. oak) is called hardwood. These names are a bit misleading, as hardwoods are not necessarily hard, and softwoods are not necessarily soft. The well-known balsa (a hardwood) is actually softer than any commercial softwood. Conversely, some softwoods (e.g. yew) are harder than many hardwoods.
There is a strong relationship between the properties of wood and the properties of the particular tree that yielded it, at least for certain species. For example, in loblolly pine, wind exposure and stem position greatly affect the hardness of wood, as well as compression wood content. The density of wood varies with species. The density of a wood correlates with its strength (mechanical properties). For example, mahogany is a medium-dense hardwood that is excellent for fine furniture crafting, whereas balsa is light, making it useful for model building. One of the densest woods is black ironwood.
Chemistry
The chemical composition of wood varies from species to species, but is approximately 50% carbon, 42% oxygen, 6% hydrogen, 1% nitrogen, and 1% other elements (mainly calcium, potassium, sodium, magnesium, iron, and manganese) by weight. Wood also contains sulfur, chlorine, silicon, phosphorus, and other elements in small quantity.
Aside from water, wood has three main components. Cellulose, a crystalline polymer derived from glucose, constitutes about 41–43%. Next in abundance is hemicellulose, which is around 20% in deciduous trees but near 30% in conifers. It is mainly five-carbon sugars that are linked in an irregular manner, in contrast to the cellulose. Lignin is the third component at around 27% in coniferous wood vs. 23% in deciduous trees. Lignin confers the hydrophobic properties reflecting the fact that it is based on aromatic rings. These three components are interwoven, and direct covalent linkages exist between the lignin and the hemicellulose. A major focus of the paper industry is the separation of the lignin from the cellulose, from which paper is made.
In chemical terms, the difference between hardwood and softwood is reflected in the composition of the constituent lignin. Hardwood lignin is primarily derived from sinapyl alcohol and coniferyl alcohol. Softwood lignin is mainly derived from coniferyl alcohol.
Extractives
Aside from the structural polymers, i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin (lignocellulose), wood contains a large variety of non-structural constituents, composed of low molecular weight organic compounds, called extractives. These compounds are present in the extracellular space and can be extracted from the wood using different neutral solvents, such as acetone. Analogous content is present in the so-called exudate produced by trees in response to mechanical damage or after being attacked by insects or fungi. Unlike the structural constituents, the composition of extractives varies over wide ranges and depends on many factors. The amount and composition of extractives differs between tree species, various parts of the same tree, and depends on genetic factors and growth conditions, such as climate and geography. For example, slower growing trees and higher parts of trees have higher content of extractives. Generally, the softwood is richer in extractives than the hardwood. Their concentration increases from the cambium to the pith. Barks and branches also contain extractives. Although extractives represent a small fraction of the wood content, usually less than 10%, they are extraordinarily diverse and thus characterize the chemistry of the wood species. Most extractives are secondary metabolites and some of them serve as precursors to other chemicals. Wood extractives display different activities, some of them are produced in response to wounds, and some of them participate in natural defense against insects and fungi.
These compounds contribute to various physical and chemical properties of the wood, such as wood color, fragnance, durability, acoustic properties, hygroscopicity, adhesion, and drying. Considering these impacts, wood extractives also affect the properties of pulp and paper, and importantly cause many problems in paper industry. Some extractives are surface-active substances and unavoidably affect the surface properties of paper, such as water adsorption, friction and strength. Lipophilic extractives often give rise to sticky deposits during kraft pulping and may leave spots on paper. Extractives also account for paper smell, which is important when making food contact materials.
Most wood extractives are lipophilic and only a little part is water-soluble. The lipophilic portion of extractives, which is collectively referred as wood resin, contains fats and fatty acids, sterols and steryl esters, terpenes, terpenoids, resin acids, and waxes. The heating of resin, i.e. distillation, vaporizes the volatile terpenes and leaves the solid component – rosin. The concentrated liquid of volatile compounds extracted during steam distillation is called essential oil. Distillation of oleoresin obtained from many pines provides rosin and turpentine.
Most extractives can be categorized into three groups: aliphatic compounds, terpenes and phenolic compounds. The latter are more water-soluble and usually are absent in the resin.
Aliphatic compounds include fatty acids, fatty alcohols and their esters with glycerol, fatty alcohols (waxes) and sterols (steryl esters). Hydrocarbons, such as alkanes, are also present in the wood. Suberin is a polyester, made of suberin acids and glycerol, mainly found in barks. Fats serve as a source of energy for the wood cells. The most common wood sterol is sitosterol, and less commonly sitostanol, citrostadienol, campesterol or cholesterol.
The main terpenes occurring in the softwood include mono-, sesqui- and diterpenes. Meanwhile, the terpene composition of the hardwood is considerably different, consisting of triterpenoids, polyprenols and other higher terpenes. Examples of mono-, di- and sesquiterpenes are α- and β-pinenes, 3-carene, β-myrcene, limonene, thujaplicins, α- and β-phellandrenes, α-muurolene, δ-cadinene, α- and δ-cadinols, α- and β-cedrenes, juniperol, longifolene, cis-abienol, borneol, pinifolic acid, nootkatin, chanootin, phytol, geranyl-linalool, β-epimanool, manoyloxide, pimaral and pimarol. Resin acids are usually tricyclic terpenoids, examples of which are pimaric acid, sandaracopimaric acid, isopimaric acid, abietic acid, levopimaric acid, palustric acid, neoabietic acid and dehydroabietic acid. Bicyclic resin acids are also found, such as lambertianic acid, communic acid, mercusic acid and secodehydroabietic acid. Cycloartenol, betulin and squalene are triterpenoids purified from hardwood. Examples of wood polyterpenes are rubber (cis-polypren), gutta percha (trans-polypren), gutta-balatá (trans-polypren) and betulaprenols (acyclic polyterpenoids). The mono- and sesquiterpenes of the softwood are responsible for the typical smell of pine forest. Many monoterpenoids, such as β-myrcene, are used in the preparation of flavors and fragrances. Tropolones, such as hinokitiol and other thujaplicins, are present in decay-resistant trees and display fungicidal and insecticidal properties. Tropolones strongly bind metal ions and can cause digester corrosion in the process kraft pulping. Owing to their metal-binding and ionophoric properties, especially thujaplicins are used in physiology experiments. Different other in-vitro biological activities of thujaplicins have been studied, such as insecticidal, anti-browning, anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, anti-proliferative and anti-oxidant.
Phenolic compounds are especially found in the hardwood and the bark. The most well-known wood phenolic constituents are stilbenes (e.g. pinosylvin), lignans (e.g. pinoresinol, conidendrin, plicatic acid, hydroxymatairesinol), norlignans (e.g. nyasol, puerosides A and B, hydroxysugiresinol, sequirin-C), tannins (e.g. gallic acid, ellagic acid), flavonoids (e.g. chrysin, taxifolin, catechin, genistein). Most of the phenolic compounds have fungicidal properties and protect the wood from fungal decay. Together with the neolignans the phenolic compounds influence on the color of the wood. Resin acids and phenolic compounds are the main toxic contaminants present in the untreated effluents from pulping. Polyphenolic compounds are one of the most abundant biomolecules produced by plants, such as flavonoids and tannins. Tannins are used in leather industry and have shown to exhibit different biological activities. Flavonoids are very diverse, widely distributed in the plant kingdom and have numerous biological activities and roles.
Uses
Production
Global production of roundwood rose from 3.5 billion m³ in 2000 to 4 billion m³ in 2021. In 2021, wood fuel was the main product with a 49 percent share of the total (2 billion m³), followed by coniferous industrial roundwood with 30 percent (1.2 billion m³) and non-coniferous industrial roundwood with 21 percent (0.9 billion m³). Asia and the Americas are the two main producing regions, accounting for 29 and 28 percent of the total roundwood production, respectively; Africa and Europe have similar shares of 20–21 percent, while Oceania produces the remaining 2 percent.
Fuel
Wood has a long history of being used as fuel, which continues to this day, mostly in rural areas of the world. Hardwood is preferred over softwood because it creates less smoke and burns longer. Adding a woodstove or fireplace to a home is often felt to add ambiance and warmth. Many lower- and middle-income countries rely on wood for energy purposes (especially cooking).
Pulpwood
Pulpwood is wood that is raised specifically for use in making paper.
Construction
Wood has been an important construction material since humans began building shelters, houses and boats. Nearly all boats were made out of wood until the late 19th century, and wood remains in common use today in boat construction. Elm in particular was used for this purpose as it resisted decay as long as it was kept wet (it also served for water pipe before the advent of more modern plumbing).
Wood to be used for construction work is commonly known as lumber in North America. Elsewhere, lumber usually refers to felled trees, and the word for sawn planks ready for use is timber. In medieval Europe oak was the wood of choice for all wood construction, including beams, walls, doors, and floors. Today a wider variety of woods is used: solid wood doors are often made from poplar, small-knotted pine, and Douglas fir.
New domestic housing in many parts of the world today is commonly made from timber-framed construction. Engineered wood products are becoming a bigger part of the construction industry. They may be used in both residential and commercial buildings as structural and aesthetic materials.
In buildings made of other materials, wood will still be found as a supporting material, especially in roof construction, in interior doors and their frames, and as exterior cladding.
Wood is also commonly used as shuttering material to form the mold into which concrete is poured during reinforced concrete construction.
Flooring
A solid wood floor is a floor laid with planks or battens created from a single piece of timber, usually a hardwood. Since wood is hydroscopic (it acquires and loses moisture from the ambient conditions around it) this potential instability effectively limits the length and width of the boards.
Solid hardwood flooring is usually cheaper than engineered timbers and damaged areas can be sanded down and refinished repeatedly, the number of times being limited only by the thickness of wood above the tongue.
Solid hardwood floors were originally used for structural purposes, being installed perpendicular to the wooden support beams of a building (the joists or bearers) and solid construction timber is still often used for sports floors as well as most traditional wood blocks, mosaics and parquetry.
Engineered products
Engineered wood products, glued building products "engineered" for application-specific performance requirements, are often used in construction and industrial applications. Glued engineered wood products are manufactured by bonding together wood strands, veneers, lumber or other forms of wood fiber with glue to form a larger, more efficient composite structural unit.
These products include glued laminated timber (glulam), wood structural panels (including plywood, oriented strand board and composite panels), laminated veneer lumber (LVL) and other structural composite lumber (SCL) products, parallel strand lumber, and I-joists. Approximately 100 million cubic meters of wood was consumed for this purpose in 1991. The trends suggest that particle board and fiber board will overtake plywood.
Wood unsuitable for construction in its native form may be broken down mechanically (into fibers or chips) or chemically (into cellulose) and used as a raw material for other building materials, such as engineered wood, as well as chipboard, hardboard, and medium-density fiberboard (MDF). Such wood derivatives are widely used: wood fibers are an important component of most paper, and cellulose is used as a component of some synthetic materials. Wood derivatives can be used for kinds of flooring, for example laminate flooring.
Furniture and utensils
Wood has always been used extensively for furniture, such as chairs and beds. It is also used for tool handles and cutlery, such as chopsticks, toothpicks, and other utensils, like the wooden spoon and pencil.
Other
Further developments include new lignin glue applications, recyclable food packaging, rubber tire replacement applications, anti-bacterial medical agents, and high strength fabrics or composites.
As scientists and engineers further learn and develop new techniques to extract various components from wood, or alternatively to modify wood, for example by adding components to wood, new more advanced products will appear on the marketplace. Moisture content electronic monitoring can also enhance next generation wood protection.
Art
Wood has long been used as an artistic medium. It has been used to make sculptures and carvings for millennia. Examples include the totem poles carved by North American indigenous people from conifer trunks, often Western Red Cedar (Thuja plicata).
Other uses of wood in the arts include:
Woodcut printmaking and engraving
Wood can be a surface to paint on, such as in panel painting
Many musical instruments are made mostly or entirely of wood
Sports and recreational equipment
Many types of sports equipment are made of wood, or were constructed of wood in the past. For example, cricket bats are typically made of white willow. The baseball bats which are legal for use in Major League Baseball are frequently made of ash wood or hickory, and in recent years have been constructed from maple even though that wood is somewhat more fragile. National Basketball Association courts have been traditionally made out of parquetry.
Many other types of sports and recreation equipment, such as skis, ice hockey sticks, lacrosse sticks and archery bows, were commonly made of wood in the past, but have since been replaced with more modern materials such as aluminium, titanium or composite materials such as fiberglass and carbon fiber. One noteworthy example of this trend is the family of golf clubs commonly known as the woods, the heads of which were traditionally made of persimmon wood in the early days of the game of golf, but are now generally made of metal or (especially in the case of drivers) carbon-fiber composites.
Bacterial degradation
Little is known about the bacteria that degrade cellulose. Symbiotic bacteria in Xylophaga may play a role in the degradation of sunken wood. Alphaproteobacteria, Flavobacteria, Actinomycetota, Clostridia, and Bacteroidota have been detected in wood submerged for over a year.

Woodcraft or woodlore is skill and experience in living and thriving in the woods, either on a short- or long-term basis. It includes skills as hunting, fishing, and camping. Traditionally, woodcraft was associated with subsistence lifestyles and hunting-gathering. In modern developed countries it is more commonly associated with outdoor recreation or survivalism. Woodcraft is one form of bushcraft.
Techniques
A partial list of recreational woodcraft techniques might include knowledge of wildlife behavior, identifying and utilizing wild plants and animals (especially for food), camp cooking, orienteering (including hiking skills and use of a map and compass), fire making (including procurement of firewood), selecting and preparing a campsite, lashing and knot techniques, the use of tents and wilderness first aid.
Contexts and significance
The Scouting movement has adopted woodcraft techniques as a core skill set known as scoutcraft.
In the United States, woodcraft techniques in a military context are taught as part of SERE (Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape) training.
Traditional woodcraft has particular importance in American folklore, especially that relating to the early American frontier.
In the UK, the Woodcraft Folk are an organisation founded on the principles of woodcraft. Other woodcraft organisations include the Woodcraft League of America, which was founded by Ernest Seton, and the Woodcraft youth movement.

Woodworking is the skill of making items from wood, and includes cabinetry, furniture making, wood carving, joinery, carpentry, and woodturning.
History
Along with stone, clay, and animal parts, wood was one of the first materials worked by early humans. Microwear analysis of the Mousterian stone tools used by the Neanderthals show that many were used to work wood. The development of civilization was closely tied to the development of increasingly greater degrees of skill in working these materials.
Among the earliest finds of woodworking are shaped sticks displaying notches from Kalambo Falls in southern Africa, dating to around 476,000 years ago. The Clacton spearhead from Clacton-on-Sea, England, dating to around 400,000 years ago, the Schöningen spears, from Schöningen (Germany) dating around 300,000 years ago and the Lehringen spear from northern Germany, dating to around 120,000 years ago, provide some of the first examples of wooden hunting implements. Wooden tools likely used for domestic activities including probable awls have also been found at Schöningen.
Flint tools were used for carving. Since Neolithic times, carved wooden vessels are known, for example, from the Linear Pottery culture wells at Kückhofen and Eythra.
Examples of Bronze Age woodcarving include tree trunks worked into coffins from northern Germany and Denmark and wooden folding-chairs. The site of Fellbach-Schmieden in Germany has provided fine examples of wooden animal statues from the Iron Age. Wooden idols from the La Tène period known from a sanctuary at the source of the Seine in France.
Ancient Egypt
There is significant evidence of advanced woodworking in ancient Egypt. Woodworking is depicted in many extant ancient Egyptian drawings, and a considerable amount of ancient Egyptian furniture (such as stools, chairs, tables, beds, chests) have been preserved. Tombs contain a large collection of these artifacts, and the inner coffins found within them were also made of wood. The metal used by the Egyptians for woodworking tools was originally copper and eventually, after 2000 BC, bronze, as iron working was unknown until much later.
Commonly used woodworking tools included axes, adzes, chisels, pull saws, and bow drills. Mortise and tenon joints are attested from the earliest Predynastic period. These joints were strengthened using pegs, dowels and leather or cord lashings. Animal glue came to be used only in the New Kingdom period. Ancient Egyptians invented the art of veneering and used varnishes for finishing. However, the composition of these varnishes is unknown. Although different native acacias were used, as was the wood from the local sycamore and tamarisk trees, deforestation in the Nile valley resulted in the need for the importation of wood, notably cedar, but also Aleppo pine, boxwood and oak, starting from the Second Dynasty.
Ancient Rome
Woodworking was essential to the Romans. It provided material for buildings, transportation, tools, and household items. Wood also provided pipes, dyes, waterproofing materials, and heat.Although most examples of Roman woodworking have been lost, the literary record preserved much of the contemporary knowledge. Vitruvius dedicates an entire chapter of his De architectura to timber, preserving many details. Pliny, while not a botanist, dedicated six books of his Natural History to trees and woody plants, providing a wealth of information on trees and their uses.
Ancient China
The progenitors of Chinese woodworking are considered to be Lu Ban (魯班 pinyin: Lǔbān) and his wife Lady Yun, from the Spring and Autumn period (771 to 476 BC). Lu Ban is said to have introduced the plane, the chalk line, and other tools to China. His teachings were supposedly left behind in the book Lu Ban Jing (魯班經, "Manuscript of Lu Ban")(魯班經 pinyin: Lǔbān jīng). Despite this, it is believed that the text was written some 1500 years after his death. This book is largely filled with descriptions of dimensions for building various items, such as flower pots, tables, altars, etc., and also contains extensive instructions on Feng Shui. It mentions almost nothing of the intricate glue-less and nail-less joinery for which Chinese furniture was so famous.
Modern day
With advances in technology and industry demands, the field of woodwork has changed. The development of Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines, for example, has made it possible to mass-produce and reproduce products faster, with less waste, and often with more complex designs than ever before. CNC wood routers can carve complicated and highly detailed shapes into flat stock to create signs or art. Rechargeable power tools speed up the creation of many projects and require much less physical strength than in the past, for example, when boring multiple holes.
Skilled fine woodworking, however, remains a craft pursued by many. There remains demand for handcrafted work such as furniture and art; however, due to production rates and costs, consumer prices are much higher.
Modern wood carving usually refers to works of wood art produced by woodcarvers as contemporary art. This type of woodcarving often combines traditional techniques with more modern artistic styles and concepts. Modern woodcarving can be produced in a variety of forms and styles, from realistic to abstract, and often uses unusual woods, such as rain tree or woods with unique textures, to highlight the work's uniqueness.
In recent years, the art of modern woodcarving has become increasingly popular among woodworkers and visual art enthusiasts not only in Asia but also worldwide. Modern woodcarving art is often exhibited in art galleries and museums, and can be seen in several global contemporary art exhibitions.
Styles and designs
Woodworking, especially furniture making, has many different designs/styles. Throughout its history, woodworking designs and styles have changed. Some of the more common styles are listed below. Traditional furniture styles usually include pieces that have been around for a long time and have long been associated with wealth and luxury. More modern furniture styles have been commonly used over the past few hundred years.
Materials
See also Wood: Properties and Tonewood: Properties.
Historically, woodworkers relied on the woods native to their region until innovations in transportation and trade made more exotic woods available to the craftsman. Woods are typically sorted into three basic types: hardwoods typified by tight grain and derived from broadleaf trees, softwoods from coniferous trees, and manufactured materials such as plywood and MDF.
Hardwoods, botanically classified as angiosperms, are deciduous and shed their leaves annually in response to temperature changes. Softwoods come from trees botanically known as gymnosperms, which are coniferous, cone-bearing, and stay green year round. Although a general pattern, softwoods are not necessarily always "softer" than hardwoods, and vice versa.
Softwood is most commonly found in regions with lower temperatures and is typically less durable, lighter in weight, and more vulnerable to pests and fungal attacks than hardwoods. They typically have a paler color and a more open grain than hardwoods, which contributes to the tendency of felled softwood to shrink and swell as it dries. Softwoods usually have a lower density, around 432–592 kg/m3, which can compromise its strength. Density, however, does vary within both softwoods and hardwoods depending on the wood's geographical origin and growth rate. However, the lower density of softwoods also allows them to have greater strength relative to their weight. In the United States, softwoods are typically cheaper and more readily available. Most softwoods are suitable for general construction, especially framing, trim, and finish work, and carcassing.
Hardwoods are separated into two categories, temperate and tropical hardwoods, depending on their origin. Temperate hardwoods are found in the regions between the tropics and the poles and are of particular interest to woodworkers for their cost-effective aesthetic appeal and their sustainable sourcing. Tropical hardwoods are found within the equatorial belt, including Africa, Asia, and South America. Hardwoods flaunt a higher density, around 1041 kg/m3 as a result of slower growing rates, and are more stable when drying. As a result of their high density, hardwoods are typically heavier than softwoods but can also be more brittle. While there are an abundant number of hardwood species, only 200 are common enough and pliable enough to be used for woodworking. Hardwoods have a wide variety of properties, making it easy to find a hardwood to suit nearly any purpose, but they are especially suitable for outdoor use due to their strength and resilience to rot and decay. The coloring of hardwoods ranges from light to very dark, making it especially versatile for aesthetic purposes. However, because hardwoods are more closely grained, they are typically harder to work than softwoods. They are also harder to acquire in the United States and, as a result, are more expensive.
Typically, furniture such as tables and chairs is made from solid hardwood stock due to its strength and resistance to warping. Additionally, they also have a greater variety of grain patterns and color, and take a finish better, which allows the woodworker to exercise a great deal of artistic liberty. Hardwoods can be cut more cleanly and leave less residue on sawblades and other woodworking tools. Cabinet/fixture makers employ the use of plywood and other manufactured panel products. Some furniture, such as the Windsor chair, involves green woodworking, shaping with wood while it contains its natural moisture before drying.
Common softwoods used for furniture
Cedar
Cedars are strong, aromatic softwoods that are capable of enduring outdoor elements, the most common of which is the western red cedar. Western red cedar can withstand wet conditions without rotting and, as a result, is commonly used for outdoor projects such as patios, outdoor furniture, and building exteriors. This wood can be easily found at most home centers in the US and Canada for a moderate price.
Fir
In the USA, fir, also known as Douglas fir, is inexpensive and readily available at local home centers. It has a characteristic straight, pronounced grain with a red-brown tint. However, its grain pattern is relatively plain, and it does not stain well, so fir is commonly used for finished products that will be painted. While commonly used for building, this softwood would also be suitable for furniture-making.
Pine
White pine, ponderosa, and southern yellow pine are common species used in furniture-making. White pine and ponderosa are typically used for indoor projects, while Southern yellow pine is recommended for outdoor projects due to its durability.
Common hardwoods used for furniture
Ash
Ash is relatively easy to work with and takes stain well. However, ash is much more difficult to find than other common woods, and will not be found at the local home center. Larger lumber yards should have it in stock.
Beech
Hardwood of the European species Fagus sylvatica is widely used for furniture framing and carcase construction, in plywood, musical instruments (drum shells and piano blocks), and turned items like knobs.
Birch
Whether yellow or white birch, these hardwoods are stable and easy to work with. Despite this, birch is prone to blotching when stained, so painting birch products is probably best. Birch is easily found at many home centers and is a relatively inexpensive hardwood.
Cherry
Easy to work with, cherry wood is in high demand for its reddish-brown color and ease of staining and finishing. Cherry likely will not be at the local home center, but should be bought at a lumberyard for a higher price. This hardwood is a very common material for furniture, and is resistant to normal wear-and-tear.
Mahogany
A hardwood, mahogany has a trademark reddish-brown to deep-red tint and is known as "one of the great furniture woods". However, mahogany is not typically grown in sustainably managed forests, and thus commands a steep price at local lumber yards.
Oak
With two varieties, red and white, oak is known to be easy to work with and relatively strong. However, furniture makers often opt for white oak over red oak for its attractive figure and moisture-resistance. Depending on the kind needed, oak can probably be found at a local home center or a lumberyard for a bit pricier than other hardwoods.
Maple
With strength, sturdiness, and durability, maple is a common material for bedroom furniture and even china cabinets. Maple is moisture-resistant and frequently displays stand-out swirls in the wood grain, an aesthetically pleasing differentiator from other hardwoods. While most commonly a lighter color, maple can also take stains and paint well.
Factors in choosing materials
There are many factors to consider when deciding what type of wood to use for a project. One of the most important aspects is the workability of the wood: how it responds when worked by hand or with tools, the quality of the grain, and its response to adhesives and finishes. When the workability of wood is high, it offers a lower resistance when cutting and has a diminished blunting effect on tools. Highly workable wood is easier to manipulate into desired forms. If the wood grain is straight and even, it will be much easier to create strong and durable glued joints. Additionally, it will help protect the wood from splitting when nailed or screwed. Coarse grains require a lengthy process of filing and rubbing down the grain to produce a smooth result.
Another important factor is the wood's durability, especially with respect to moisture. If the finished project will be exposed to moisture (e.g., outdoor projects) or to high humidity or condensation (e.g., in kitchens or bathrooms), the wood needs to be especially durable to prevent rot. Because of their oily properties, many tropical hardwoods, such as teak and mahogany, are popular for these applications.
Woods with good working properties
Agba (Gossweilerodendron balsamiferum)
Alder (Alnus glutinosa)
Basswood (Tilia americana)
Obeah (Triplochiton scleroxylon)
Pine (Pinus)
Western cedar (Thuja plicata)
Very durable woods
Teak (Tectona grandis)
Iron (Milicia excelsa)
Jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata)
Chestnut (Castanea)
Oak (Quercus)
Cedar (Thuja)
Woods used for carving
While many woods can be used for carving, there are some clear favorites, including aspen, basswood, butternut, black walnut, and oak. Because it has almost no grain and is notably soft, Basswood is particularly popular with beginner carvers. It is used in many lower-cost instruments, such as guitars and electric basses. Aspen is similarly soft, although slightly harder, and readily available and inexpensive. Butternut has a deeper hue than basswood and aspen and has a nice grain that is easy to carve, and thus friendly for beginners. It is also suitable for furniture. While more expensive than basswood, aspen, and butternut, black walnut is a popular choice for its rich color and grain. Lastly, oak is a strong, sturdy, and versatile wood for carving with a defined grain. It is also a popular wood for furniture making.
Tools
Each area of woodworking requires a different set of tools. Power tools and hand tools are both used for woodworking. Many modern woodworkers choose to use power tools in their trade for added ease and time savings. However, many woodworkers still choose to use only hand tools for reasons such as tradition, experience, and the added character of the work. In contrast, others do so simply for their own enjoyment.
Notable woodworkers

Wrought iron is an iron alloy with a very low carbon content (less than 0.05%) in contrast to that of cast iron (2.1% to 4.5%), or 0.25% for low-carbon "mild" steel. Wrought iron is manufactured by heating and melting high-carbon cast iron in an open charcoal or coke hearth or furnace in a process known as puddling. The high temperatures cause the excess carbon to oxidise, the iron being stirred or puddled during the process in order to achieve this. As the carbon content reduces, the melting point of the iron increases, ultimately to a level which is higher than can be achieved by the hearth, hence the wrought iron is never fully molten and many impurities remain.
The primary advantage of wrought iron over cast iron is its malleability – where cast iron is too brittle to bend or shape without breaking, wrought iron is highly malleable, and much easier to bend.
Wrought iron is a semi-fused mass of iron with fibrous slag inclusions (up to 2% by weight), which give it a wood-like "grain" that is visible when it is etched, rusted, or bent to failure. Wrought iron is tough, malleable, ductile, corrosion resistant, and easily forge welded, but is more difficult to weld electrically.
Before the development of effective methods of steelmaking and the availability of large quantities of steel, wrought iron was the most common form of malleable iron. It was given the name wrought because it was hammered, rolled, or otherwise worked while hot enough to expel molten slag. The modern functional equivalent of wrought iron is mild steel, also called low-carbon steel. Neither wrought iron nor mild steel contain enough carbon to be hardened by heating and quenching.
The properties of wrought iron vary, depending upon the type of iron used and the variability inherent in the relatively crude and labour intensive manufacturing process. It is generally relatively pure iron with a very low carbon content plus a small amount of mostly silicate slag, which forms fibreous or laminar inclusions, caused by the hot rolling process used to form it into long bars or rods. Because these silicate inclusions separate layers of iron and form planes of weakness, wrought iron is anisotropic, its strength varying depending on its orientation. Wrought iron may typically be composed of around 99.4% iron by mass. The presence of slag can be beneficial for blacksmithing operations, such as forge welding, since the silicate inclusions act as a flux and give the material its unique, fibrous structure. The silicate filaments in the slag also protect the iron from corrosion and may diminish the effect of fatigue caused by shock and vibration.
Historically, a modest amount of wrought iron was refined into steel, which was used mainly to produce swords, cutlery, chisels, axes, and other edged tools, as well as springs and files. The demand for wrought iron reached its peak in the 1860s, being in high demand for ironclad warships and railway use. However, as advances in ferrous metallurgy improved the quality of mild steel, and as the Bessemer process and the Siemens–Martin process made steel much cheaper to produce, the use of wrought iron declined.
Many items, before they came to be made of mild steel, were produced from wrought iron, including rivets, nails, wire, chains, rails, railway couplings, water and steam pipes, nuts, bolts, horseshoes, handrails, wagon tires, straps for timber roof trusses, and ornamental ironwork, among many other things.
Wrought iron is no longer produced on a commercial scale. Many products described as wrought iron, such as guard rails, garden furniture, and gates are made of mild steel. They are described as "wrought iron" only because they have been made to resemble objects which in the past were wrought (worked) by hand by a blacksmith (although many decorative iron objects, including fences and gates, were often cast rather than wrought).
Terminology
The word "wrought" is an archaic past participle of the verb "to work", and so "wrought iron" literally means "worked iron". Wrought iron is a general term for the commodity, but is also used more specifically for finished iron goods, as manufactured by a blacksmith. It was used in that narrower sense in British Customs records, such manufactured iron was subject to a higher rate of duty than what might be called "unwrought" iron. Cast iron, unlike wrought iron, is brittle and cannot be worked either hot or cold.
In the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, wrought iron went by a wide variety of terms according to its form, origin, or quality.
While the bloomery process produced wrought iron directly from ore, cast iron or pig iron were the starting materials used in the finery forge and puddling furnace. Pig iron and cast iron have higher carbon content than wrought iron, but have a lower melting point than iron or steel. Cast and especially pig iron have excess slag which must be at least partially removed to produce quality wrought iron. At foundries it was common to blend scrap wrought iron with cast iron to improve the physical properties of castings.
For several years after the introduction of Bessemer and open hearth steel, there were different opinions as to what differentiated iron from steel; some believed it was the chemical composition and others that it was whether the iron heated sufficiently to melt and "fuse". Fusion eventually became generally accepted as relatively more important than composition below a given low carbon concentration. Another difference is that steel can be hardened by heat treating.
Historically, wrought iron was known as "commercially pure iron"; however, it no longer qualifies because current standards for commercially pure iron require a carbon content of less than 0.008 wt%.
Types and shapes
Bar iron is a generic term sometimes used to distinguish it from cast iron. It is the equivalent of an ingot of cast metal, in a convenient form for handling, storage, shipping and further working into a finished product.
The bars were the usual product of the finery forge, but not necessarily made by that process:
Rod iron—cut from flat bar iron in a slitting mill provided the raw material for spikes and nails.
Hoop iron—suitable for the hoops of barrels, made by passing rod iron through rolling dies.
Plate iron—sheets suitable for use as boiler plate.
Blackplate—sheets, perhaps thinner than plate iron, from the black rolling stage of tinplate production.
Voyage iron—narrow flat bar iron, made or cut into bars of a particular weight, a commodity for sale in Africa for the Atlantic slave trade. The number of bars per ton gradually increased from 70 per ton in the 1660s to 75–80 per ton in 1685 and "near 92 to the ton" in 1731.
Origin
Charcoal iron—until the end of the 18th century, wrought iron was smelted from ore using charcoal, by the bloomery process. Wrought iron was also produced from pig iron using a finery forge or in a Lancashire hearth. The resulting metal was highly variable, both in chemistry and slag content.
Puddled iron—the puddling process was the first large-scale process to produce wrought iron. In the puddling process, pig iron is refined in a reverberatory furnace to prevent contamination of the iron from the sulfur in the coal or coke. The molten pig iron is manually stirred, exposing the iron to atmospheric oxygen, which decarburizes the iron. As the iron is stirred, globs of wrought iron are collected into balls by the stirring rod (rabble arm or rod) and those are periodically removed by the puddler. Puddling was patented in 1784 and became widely used after 1800. By 1876, annual production of puddled iron in the UK alone was over 4 million tons. Around that time, the open hearth furnace was able to produce steel of suitable quality for structural purposes, and wrought iron production went into decline.
Oregrounds iron—a particularly pure grade of bar iron made ultimately from iron ore from the Dannemora mine in Sweden. Its most important use was as the raw material for the cementation process of steelmaking.
Danks iron—originally iron imported to Great Britain from Gdańsk, but in the 18th century more probably the kind of iron (from eastern Sweden) that once came from Gdańsk.
Forest iron—iron from the English Forest of Dean, where haematite ore enabled tough iron to be produced.
Lukes iron—iron imported from Liège, whose Dutch name is "Luik".
Ames iron or amys iron—another variety of iron imported to England from northern Europe. Its origin has been suggested to be Amiens, but it seems to have been imported from Flanders in the 15th century and Holland later, suggesting an origin in the Rhine valley. Its origins remain controversial.
Botolf iron or Boutall iron—from Bytów (Polish Pomerania) or Bytom (Polish Silesia).
Sable iron (or Old Sable)—iron bearing the mark (a sable) of the Demidov family of Russian ironmasters, one of the better brands of Russian iron.
Quality
Tough iron
Also spelled "tuf", is not brittle and is strong enough to be used for tools.
Blend iron
Made using a mixture of different types of pig iron.
Best iron
Iron put through several stages of piling and rolling to reach the stage regarded (in the 19th century) as the best quality.
Marked bar iron
Made by members of the Marked Bar Association and marked with the maker's brand mark as a sign of its quality.
Defects
Wrought iron is a form of commercial iron containing less than 0.10% of carbon, less than 0.25% of impurities total of sulfur, phosphorus, silicon and manganese, and less than 2% slag by weight.
Wrought iron is redshort or hot short if it contains sulfur in excess quantity. It has sufficient tenacity when cold, but cracks when bent or finished at a red heat. Hot short iron was considered unmarketable.
Cold short iron, also known as coldshear, colshire, contains excessive phosphorus. It is very brittle when cold and cracks if bent. It may, however, be worked at high temperature. Historically, coldshort iron was considered sufficient for nails.
Phosphorus is not necessarily detrimental to iron. Ancient Near Eastern smiths did not add lime to their furnaces. The absence of calcium oxide in the slag, and the deliberate use of wood with high phosphorus content during the smelting, induces a higher phosphorus content (typically <0.3%) than in modern iron (<0.02–0.03%). Analysis of the Iron Pillar of Delhi gives 0.11% in the iron. The included slag in wrought iron also imparts corrosion resistance.
Antique music wire, manufactured at a time when mass-produced carbon-steels were available, was found to have low carbon and high phosphorus; iron with high phosphorus content, normally causing brittleness when worked cold, was easily drawn into music wires. Although at the time phosphorus was not an easily identified component of iron, it was hypothesized that the type of iron had been rejected for conversion to steel but excelled when tested for drawing ability.
History
China
During the Han dynasty (202 BC – 220 AD), new iron smelting processes led to the manufacture of new wrought iron implements for use in agriculture, such as the multi-tube seed drill and iron plough. In addition to accidental lumps of low-carbon wrought iron produced by excessive injected air in ancient Chinese cupola furnaces, the ancient Chinese created wrought iron by using the finery forge at least by the 2nd century BC, the earliest specimens of cast and pig iron fined into wrought iron and steel found at the early Han dynasty site at Tieshengguo. Pigott speculates that the finery forge existed in the previous Warring States period (403–221 BC), due to the fact that there are wrought iron items from China dating to that period and there is no documented evidence of the bloomery ever being used in China. The fining process involved liquifying cast iron in a fining hearth and removing carbon from the molten cast iron through oxidation. Wagner writes that in addition to the Han dynasty hearths believed to be fining hearths, there is also pictorial evidence of the fining hearth from a Shandong tomb mural dated 1st to 2nd century AD, as well as a hint of written evidence in the 4th century AD Daoist text Taiping Jing.
Western world
Wrought iron has been used for many centuries, and is the "iron" that is referred to throughout Western history. The other form of iron, cast iron, was in use in China since ancient times but was not introduced into Western Europe until the 15th century; even then, due to its brittleness, it could be used for only a limited number of purposes. Throughout much of the Middle Ages, iron was produced by the direct reduction of ore in manually operated bloomeries, although water power had begun to be employed by 1104.
The raw material produced by all indirect processes is pig iron. It has a high carbon content and as a consequence, it is brittle and cannot be used to make hardware. The osmond process was the first of the indirect processes, developed by 1203, but bloomery production continued in many places. The process depended on the development of the blast furnace, of which medieval examples have been discovered at Lapphyttan, Sweden and in Germany.
The bloomery and osmond processes were gradually replaced from the 15th century by finery processes, of which there were two versions, the German and Walloon. They were in turn replaced from the late 18th century by puddling, with certain variants such as the Swedish Lancashire process. Those, too, are now obsolete, and wrought iron is no longer manufactured commercially.
Bloomery process
Wrought iron was originally produced by a variety of smelting processes, all described today as "bloomeries". Different forms of bloomery were used at different places and times. The bloomery was charged with charcoal and iron ore and then lit. Air was blown in through a tuyere to heat the bloomery to a temperature somewhat below the melting point of iron. In the course of the smelt, slag would melt and run out, and carbon monoxide from the charcoal would reduce the ore to iron, which formed a spongy mass (called a "bloom") containing iron and also molten silicate minerals (slag) from the ore. The iron remained in the solid state. If the bloomery were allowed to become hot enough to melt the iron, carbon would dissolve into it and form pig or cast iron. Because this was not the intention, however, the design of a bloomery made it difficult to reach the melting point of iron, and also prevented the concentration of carbon monoxide from becoming high.
After smelting was complete, the bloom was removed, and the process could then be started again. It was thus a batch process, rather than a continuous one such as a blast furnace. The bloom had to be forged mechanically to consolidate it and shape it into a bar, expelling slag in the process.
During the Middle Ages, water-power was applied to the process, probably initially for powering bellows, and only later to hammers for forging the blooms. However, while it is certain that water-power was used, the details remain uncertain. That was the culmination of the direct process of ironmaking. It survived in Spain and southern France as Catalan Forges to the mid 19th century, in Austria as the stuckofen to 1775, and near Garstang in England until about 1770; it was still in use with hot blast in New York in the 1880s. In Japan the last of the old tatara bloomeries used in production of traditional tamahagane steel, mainly used in swordmaking, was extinguished only in 1925, though in the late 20th century the production resumed on a low scale to supply the steel to the artisan swordmakers.
Osmond process
Osmond iron consisted of balls of wrought iron, produced by melting pig iron and catching the droplets on a staff, which was spun in front of a blast of air so as to expose as much of it as possible to the air and oxidise its carbon content. The resultant ball was often forged into bar iron in a hammer mill.
Finery process
In the 15th century, the blast furnace spread into what is now Belgium where it was improved. From there, it spread via the Pays de Bray on the boundary of Normandy and then to the Weald in England. With it, the finery forge spread. Those remelted the pig iron and (in effect) burnt out the carbon, producing a bloom, which was then forged into bar iron. If rod iron was required, a slitting mill was used.
The finery process existed in two slightly different forms. In Great Britain, France, and parts of Sweden, only the Walloon process was used. That employed two different hearths, a finery hearth for finishing the iron and a chafery hearth for reheating it in the course of drawing the bloom out into a bar. The finery always burnt charcoal, but the chafery could be fired with mineral coal, since its impurities would not harm the iron when it was in the solid state. On the other hand, the German process, used in Germany, Russia, and most of Sweden used a single hearth for all stages.
The introduction of coke for use in the blast furnace by Abraham Darby in 1709 (or perhaps others a little earlier) initially had little effect on wrought iron production. Only in the 1750s was coke pig iron used on any significant scale as the feedstock of finery forges. However, charcoal continued to be the fuel for the finery.
Potting and stamping
From the late 1750s, ironmasters began to develop processes for making bar iron without charcoal. There were a number of patented processes for that, which are referred to today as potting and stamping. The earliest were developed by John Wood of Wednesbury and his brother Charles Wood of Low Mill at Egremont, patented in 1763. Another was developed for the Coalbrookdale Company by the Cranage brothers. Another important one was that of John Wright and Joseph Jesson of West Bromwich.
Puddling process
A number of processes for making wrought iron without charcoal were devised as the Industrial Revolution began during the latter half of the 18th century. The most successful of those was puddling, using a puddling furnace (a variety of the reverberatory furnace), which was invented by Henry Cort in 1784. It was later improved by others including Joseph Hall, who was the first to add iron oxide to the charge. In that type of furnace, the metal does not come into contact with the fuel, and so is not contaminated by its impurities. The heat of the combustion products passes over the surface of the puddle and the roof of the furnace reverberates (reflects) the heat onto the metal puddle on the fire bridge of the furnace.
Unless the raw material used is white cast iron, the pig iron or other raw product of the puddling first had to be refined into refined iron, or finers metal. That would be done in a refinery where raw coal was used to remove silicon and convert carbon within the raw material, found in the form of graphite, to a combination with iron called cementite.
In the fully developed process (of Hall), this metal was placed into the hearth of the puddling furnace where it was melted. The hearth was lined with oxidizing agents such as haematite and iron oxide. The mixture was subjected to a strong current of air and stirred with long bars, called puddling bars or rabbles, through working doors. The air, the stirring, and the "boiling" action of the metal helped the oxidizing agents to oxidize the impurities and carbon out of the pig iron. As the impurities oxidize, they formed a molten slag or drifted off as gas, while the remaining iron solidified into spongy wrought iron that floated to the top of the puddle and was fished out of the melt as puddle balls, using puddle bars.
Shingling
There was still some slag left in the puddle balls, so while they were still hot they would be shingled to remove the remaining slag and cinder. That was achieved by forging the balls under a hammer, or by squeezing the bloom in a machine. The material obtained at the end of shingling is known as bloom. The blooms are not useful in that form, so they were rolled into a final product.
Sometimes European ironworks would skip the shingling process completely and roll the puddle balls. The only drawback to that is that the edges of the rough bars were not as well compressed. When the rough bar was reheated, the edges might separate and be lost into the furnace.
Rolling
The bloom was passed through rollers and to produce bars. The bars of wrought iron were of poor quality, called muck bars or puddle bars. To improve their quality, the bars were cut up, piled and tied together by wires, a process known as faggoting or piling. They were then reheated to a welding state, forge welded, and rolled again into bars. The process could be repeated several times to produce wrought iron of desired quality. Wrought iron that has been rolled multiple times is called merchant bar or merchant iron.
Lancashire process
The advantage of puddling was that it used coal, not charcoal as fuel. However, that was of little advantage in Sweden, which lacked coal. Gustaf Ekman observed charcoal fineries at Ulverston, which were quite different from any in Sweden. After his return to Sweden in the 1830s, he experimented and developed a process similar to puddling but used firewood and charcoal, which was widely adopted in the Bergslagen in the following decades.
Aston process
In 1925, James Aston of the United States developed a process for manufacturing wrought iron quickly and economically. It involved taking molten steel from a Bessemer converter and pouring it into cooler liquid slag. The temperature of the steel is about 1500 °C and the liquid slag is maintained at approximately 1200 °C. The molten steel contains a large amount of dissolved gases so when the liquid steel hit the cooler surfaces of the liquid slag the gases were liberated. The molten steel then froze to yield a spongy mass having a temperature of about 1370 °C. The spongy mass would then be finished by being shingled and rolled as described under puddling (above). Three to four tons could be converted per batch with the method.
Decline
Steel began to replace iron for railroad rails as soon as the Bessemer process for its manufacture was adopted (1865 on). Iron remained dominant for structural applications until the 1880s, because of problems with brittle steel, caused by introduced nitrogen, high carbon, excess phosphorus, or excessive temperature during or too-rapid rolling. By 1890 steel had largely replaced iron for structural applications.
Sheet iron (Armco 99.97% pure iron) had good properties for use in appliances, being well-suited for enamelling and welding, and being rust-resistant.
In the 1960s, the price of steel production was dropping due to recycling, and even using the Aston process, wrought iron production was labor-intensive. It has been estimated that the production of wrought iron is approximately twice as expensive as that of low-carbon steel. In the United States, the last plant closed in 1969. The last in the world was the Atlas Forge of Thomas Walmsley and Sons in Bolton, Great Britain, which closed in 1973. Its 1860s-era equipment was moved to the Blists Hill site of Ironbridge Gorge Museum for preservation. Some wrought iron is still being produced for heritage restoration purposes, but only by recycling scrap.
Properties
Wrought iron contains approximately 250,000 slag inclusions, or stringers, per square inch, giving it properties not found in other forms of ferrous metal. A fresh fracture shows a clear bluish color with a high silky luster and fibrous appearance.
Wrought iron lacks the carbon content necessary for hardening through heat treatment, but in areas where steel was uncommon or unknown, tools were sometimes cold-worked (hence cold iron) to harden them. An advantage of its low carbon content is its excellent weldability. Furthermore, sheet wrought iron cannot bend as much as steel sheet metal when cold worked. Wrought iron can be melted and cast; however, the product is no longer wrought iron, since the slag stringers characteristic of wrought iron disappear on melting, so the product resembles impure, cast, Bessemer steel. There is no engineering advantage to melting and casting wrought iron, as compared to using cast iron or steel, both of which are cheaper.
Due to the variations in iron ore origin and iron manufacture, wrought iron can be inferior or superior in corrosion resistance, compared to other iron alloys. There are many mechanisms behind its corrosion resistance. Chilton and Evans found that nickel enrichment bands reduce corrosion. They also found that in puddled, forged, and piled iron, the working-over of the metal spread out copper, nickel, and tin impurities that produce electrochemical conditions that slow down corrosion. The slag inclusions have been shown to disperse corrosion to an even film, enabling the iron to resist pitting. Another study has shown that slag inclusions are pathways to corrosion. Other studies show that sulfur in the wrought iron decreases corrosion resistance, while phosphorus increases corrosion resistance. Chloride ions also decrease wrought iron's corrosion resistance.
Wrought iron may be welded in the same manner as mild steel, but the presence of oxide or inclusions will give defective results.
The material has a rough surface, so it can hold platings and coatings better than smooth steel. For instance, a galvanic zinc finish applied to wrought iron is approximately 25–40% thicker than the same finish on steel. In Table 1, the chemical composition of wrought iron is compared to that of pig iron and carbon steel. Although it appears that wrought iron and plain carbon steel have similar chemical compositions, that is deceptive. Most of the manganese, sulfur, phosphorus, and silicon in the wrought iron are incorporated into the slag fibers, making wrought iron purer than plain carbon steel.
Amongst its other properties, wrought iron becomes soft at red heat and can be easily forged and forge welded. It can be used to form temporary magnets, but it cannot be magnetized permanently, and is ductile, malleable, and tough.
Ductility
For most purposes, ductility rather than tensile strength is a more important measure of the quality of wrought iron. In tensile testing, the best irons are able to undergo considerable elongation before failure. Higher tensile wrought iron is brittle.
Because of the large number of boiler explosions on steamboats in the early 1800s, the U.S. Congress passed legislation in 1830 which approved funds for correcting the problem. The treasury awarded a $1500 contract to the Franklin Institute to conduct a study. As part of the study, Walter R. Johnson and Benjamin Reeves conducted strength tests on boiler iron using a tester they had built in 1832 based on a design by Lagerhjelm in Sweden. Because of misunderstandings about tensile strength and ductility, their work did little to reduce failures.
The importance of ductility was recognized by some very early in the development of tube boilers, evidenced by Thurston's comment:
If made of such good iron as the makers claimed to have put into them "which worked like lead," they would, as also claimed, when ruptured, open by tearing, and discharge their contents without producing the usual disastrous consequences of a boiler explosion.
Various 19th-century investigations of boiler explosions, especially those by insurance companies, found causes to be most commonly the result of operating boilers above the safe pressure range, either to get more power, or due to defective boiler pressure relief valves and difficulties of obtaining reliable indications of pressure and water levels. Poor fabrication was also a common problem. Also, the thickness of the iron in steam drums was low, by modern standards.
By the late 19th century, when metallurgists were able to better understand what properties and processes made good iron, iron in steam engines was being displaced by steel, whilst the old cylindrical boilers with fire tubes were displaced by inherently safer water tube boilers.
Purity
In 2010, Gerry McDonnell demonstrated in England by analysis that a wrought iron bloom, from a traditional smelt, could be worked into 99.7% pure iron with no evidence of carbon. It was found that the stringers common to other wrought irons were not present, thus making it very malleable for the smith to work hot and cold. A commercial source of pure iron is available and is used by smiths as an alternative to traditional wrought iron and other new generation ferrous metals.
Applications
Wrought iron furniture has a long history, dating back to Roman times. There are 13th century wrought iron gates in Westminster Abbey in London, and wrought iron furniture seemed to reach its peak popularity in Britain in the 17th century, during the reign of William III and Mary II. However, cast iron and cheaper steel caused a gradual decline in wrought iron manufacture; the last wrought ironworks in Britain closed in 1974.
It is also used to make home decor items such as baker's racks, wine racks, pot racks, etageres, table bases, desks, gates, beds, candle holders, curtain rods, bars, and bar stools.
The vast majority of wrought iron available today is from reclaimed materials. Old bridges and anchor chains dredged from harbors are major sources. The greater corrosion resistance of wrought iron is due to the siliceous impurities (naturally occurring in iron ore), namely ferrous silicate.
Wrought iron has been used for decades as a generic term across the gate and fencing industry, even though mild steel is used for manufacturing these "wrought iron" gates. This is mainly because of the limited availability of true wrought iron. Steel can also be hot-dip galvanised to prevent corrosion, which cannot be done with wrought iron.

The Wundowie charcoal iron and wood distillation plant manufactured pig iron between 1948 and 1981 and wood distillation products between 1950 and 1977, at Wundowie, Western Australia.
Originally a state-owned enterprise, it seems not to have been incorporated as a company, during the time it was known as the Charcoal Iron and Steel Industry.
At its greatest extent, the plant comprised two blast furnaces, a metal foundry, a sawmill, retorts for charcoal production, a power plant, and a refinery for wood distillation products. The planned garden town of Wundowie, approximately 65 kilometres (40 mi) east of Perth by road and 30 kilometres (19 mi) west of Northam, was built to provide accommodation for the workers of the plant.
From 1966, the plant was privately managed by Australian National Industries, and its workers became employees of that company. The plant was sold by the government in 1974 to Agnew-Clough Ltd.
Production of iron ceased in 1981. The foundry continued in operation, under several different owners, and was still operating in 2019.
The blast furnaces at Wundowie were not the last ones to make charcoal iron in commercial quantities; as of 2013 there were still charcoal-based iron and steel-making operations in Brazil.
Historical context
A deposit of limonite iron ore existed at the future site of Wundowie, as nearby did extensive jarrah forests. There were other iron ore deposits nearby, at Coates Siding and Clackline. The future site of Wundowie lay along the route of the Eastern Railway, providing transport to and from Perth and access to further iron ore deposits to the east at Koolyanobbing. Limestone – for use as a smelting flux – could be obtained from the Perth coastal plain.
Until 1966, it was conventional wisdom that iron ore was scarce in Australia and—as a strategic mineral reserved for local manufacturing—its export was banned in 1938. That left the only way to exploit local iron ore being the secondary processing of the ore to make iron. By 1943, an iron and steel industry was well established in New South Wales—at Newcastle (from 1915) and Port Kembla (relocated from Lithgow in 1928)—and in South Australia—at Whyalla (from 1941).
Although Western Australia had significant deposits of iron ore, the absence of coking coal disadvantaged the state as a location for an iron and steel industry. The south-west of the state did have extensive forests of jarrah, which made excellent charcoal that—provided it could be produced economically—could be used in a blast furnace instead of coke. At the time, such forests were considered a managed natural resource, and ripe for exploitation.
Immediately before and during the Great Depression, Australia—then largely an exporter of agricultural and mineral commodities—suffered as commodity prices fell. Unemployment peaked at 27% in 1932. During World War II, under wartime industry controls, unemployment in Australia reached a new low of 1.1%. During the war, new manufacturing facilities were established and employment in the sector accounted for much of the reduction in unemployment; the government saw growth in manufacturing as providing reliable employment, which would reduce the chance of another depression. Manufacturing in Australia was protected from import competition by a regime of tariffs.
At the end of World War II, the Commonwealth government and all state governments, except South Australia, were held by Australian Labor Party. The ALP has a key part of its platform known as the socialist objective. In more recent times, the socialist objective has largely been ignored but, in the 1940s, the ALP's policy was to centralise control of the economy, including plans to nationalise the banks. A significant number of large enterprises in the Australian economy were already state-owned enterprises, and the government thinking of the time was that was a desirable outcome.
Western Australia lies far from the more-industrialised, eastern parts of Australia. During and immediately after World War II, it had a Labor government. The government's view was that its involvement would be needed to facilitate the industrial development of the state. It also saw an iron and steel industry using local iron ore as being key to further industrialisation of the sparsely populated state.
Bert Hawke was the Minister of Industrial Development. He was also a member for the electorate of Northam, which contained the future location of Wundowrie.
History of operations
Foundation and construction
Although the government had been investigating local production of iron using charcoal for some years, the story of the plant at Wundowrie begins with the passing of the Wood Distillation and Charcoal Iron and Steel Industry Act 1943. This authorised the state government to set up and operate a plant to carry out wood distillation and the production of Charcoal Iron and of Steel and to set up a Charcoal Iron and Steel Industry Board of Management. The champion of this legislation was Bert Hawke.
The plant was to produce 10,000 tons of pig iron, 480 tons of acetic acid, and 112,000 gallons of wood naphtha each year. The chemicals were to be a by-product of the production—via destructive distillation of wood, in externally-heated closed retorts—of charcoal to be used in a blast furnace for making iron. The production of these chemicals was intended to enhance the commercial viability of the iron-making operation. The wood would come from the jarrah forests in the area, and any wood suitable for use as timber would be processed as sawn timber, to further enhance the commercial viability; wood for the retorts would mainly consist of offcuts and waste wood from the sawmilling operations.
Work at the site was underway by November 1944. In March 1945, the foundations for the blast furnace had been constructed but work on the furnace itself was held up by lack of steel, and work on the retorts had commenced.
The Department of Housing developed the model township of Wundowie, based on garden town principles, to house the workers at the plant.
In 1947, there was a change of government in Western Australia, and the incoming government—while still supporting in principle an iron and steel industry for south-west WA—held an enquiry into the Wundowie development, and placed a hold on building housing and business premises in the new town. However, construction of the plant itself was, by then, well advanced and the enquiry findings were in favour of the project. It was completed in late 1947.
Initial operation
On 22 January 1948, the Wundowie blast furnace produced its first iron. The smelting works were officially opened on 15 April 1948, by the new Premier of Western Australia, Ross McLarty. The wood distillation products refinery did not commence operating until January 1950.
It was expected that the entire output of 10,000 tons of iron per annum would be taken by the local foundries and the Chamberlain tractor project at Welshpool.
Difficulties experienced by the State Electricity Commission meant that the plant had to commence operating without its connection to the main grid. There were power shortages, until the grid connection became operational in October 1950. The plant used two forms of on-site power generation: steam and diesel. Two Babcock & Wilcox boilers were installed, capable of using four different kinds of fuel: blast furnace gas, wood, sawdust and tar. These different materials could be used separately or together. The steam generated by the boilers operated a 250 kW turbogenerator. Once the state grid supplied power, this generator continued to supply power to all the continuous processes on the site, such as the retorts, the blast furnace and the townsite. The supply grid powered the sawmills and the ore crushing equipment. Two diesel generators were available on stand-by.
Enhancement and expansion
The ore deposit at Wundowie was less extensive and more variable than initially thought and, from 1950, ore to mix with it was sourced from Koolyanobbing. By April 1951, the Board had decided to use Koolyanobbing ore exclusively; plant to process the ore was built at Koolyanobbing, from where it was sent by truck to Southern Cross where it was loaded onto trains. The Koolyanobbing ore had a significantly higher iron content.
Iron pigs were originally cast in sand moulds. The consistency of the pig's size, weight, and silica content was improved when pig-casting machine was put into operation in 1952.
Iron from the plant was used in the production of Chamberlain tractors. By 1955, the plant was having trouble fulfilling its orders.
During the period from the 1953 election to the 1959 election, Bert Hawke—member for Northam, who had been a force behind the establishment of the plant—was the Premier of Western Australia, something that was a favourable circumstance for the expansion of the plant at Wundowie. During 1955, the board discussed expanding the plant with the premier, and cabinet approved the expansion of the industry in May 1956; £300,000 was allocated for the expansion, which consisted of two new retorts, a second blast furnace, and associated equipment.
The second blast furnace entered service in early 1958 and the additional retorts were put into full operation in 1959. The production level for 1958/59 was 24,330 tons. In the following year, production levels had risen to 47,534 tons.
Difficulties and change to private management
The refinery for the wood distillation products proved to be less viable than the iron smelting operations. There was a lack of demand for its products in Western Australia, and the cost of transporting its products to other places affected its viability. Closing the refinery was investigated in 1958, but it was found to be marginally profitable and was kept in operation.
Production reached a record 52,262 tons of iron in 1960/61 but afterwards began to decline, due to static iron prices and escalating production costs. The plant lost £13,809 in 1963/64, not including loan costs. A study was carried out on future alternatives for the plant under full private ownership. One alternative identified was to operate a foundry at the site to make cast products, adding value to pig iron produced there. For this, more capital would be needed.
The realignment of the Eastern Railway opened in 1966 caused another difficulty for the Wundowie works, which were located on the old narrow-gauge line some distance from the new line. A section of the old narrow-gauge line from Northam remained open to allow ore trains to reach Wundowie. The Western Australian Government Railways overcame the problem of transporting iron ore the 322 km from Koolyanobbing to Wundowie, over two gauges. Special purpose open-topped, end-loading containers were lifted off flat cars from one gauge to another. Following a related realignment of the Eastern Goldfields Railway, the new line also carried iron ore directly from Koolyanobbing to BHP's newly opened blast furnace at Kwinana on Cockburn Sound. The existence, in Western Australia, of another and much larger capacity iron-producing plant probably coloured the state government's view about the future of the small marginally-economic plant at Wundowie.
The Liberal government of Western Australia became unwilling to commit to capital investment in the Wundowie plant. In June 1966, the government reached agreement with Australian National Industries (ANI) to take over management of the iron plant, build a foundry, and assume responsibility for future capital needs. In return, the government would receive a 25% share of profits. ANI received a ten-year option to buy the plant. Workers at the plant became employees of ANI.
In 1973—the final year before it was sold by the government—the Wundowie plant produced pig iron to the value of A$3.1 million.
Sale, private ownership and end of iron production
The plant was sold by the government to Agnew-Clough Ltd in 1974, but that company did not take over the iron plant until June 1975. It became known as Wundowie Iron and Steel, a division of Agnew-Clough Ltd.
Agnew-Clough planned to set up a plant to process vanadium ore to produce vanadium pentoxide at the site, while continuing to operate the iron plant. The vanadium plant commenced operations in 1980.
The refinery had become uneconomic and closed in April 1977. In 1979, the saw mill was closed. Still reliant on supplies of wood for charcoal, the plant became increasingly less economically viable. Production of iron ceased in February 1981. All mining at Koolyanobbing ceased once the Australian Iron & Steel blast furnace at Kwinana also closed in 1982. For the first time since 1948, no iron was being made in Western Australia.
After iron production
Other smelting operations and proposals
It had been expected that the vanadium plant would absorb some of the workforce from the iron plant, but that plant closed in March 1982, due to technical problems and a market downturn.
Around 1987, there was a proposal to smelt silicon metal at Wundowie. This did not eventuate and a new silicon smelter—using charcoal as a reducing agent—was set up at Wellesley, entering production in 1989–1990.
Wundowie Foundry
After iron production ceased, the foundry continued in operation. The Wundowie Stove, a pot-belly stove designed in the plant's design office, was produced in the foundry from 1982 until 2005. The foundry also made anvils from ductile iron.
Wundowie Foundry Pty Ltd was founded in 1985, and was privately owned. New furnaces were installed in 1991 for the production of steel castings. In 2004–05, a consortium of managers bought the foundry and reassured the community that the operation was secure.
The Wundowie Foundry was acquired by Bradken on 14 November 2006. With the subsequent acquisition of Bradken by Hitachi Construction Machinery, in 2017, the Bradken foundry is now a part of that group.
Wundowie
The garden township of Wundowie suffered from the fall in employment after iron production ceased and the vanadium plant closed. By 1985, many households in the town's public housing were occupied by welfare recipients, for many of whom the planned town was a beautiful place to live but one lacking in social services.
Legacy and remnants
Wundowie in 1981 was one of the last places where charcoal iron was made in significant quantities in the developed world. Charcoal iron is still made in Brazil.
The blast furnaces at Wundowie were, when operating, the only iron-making plant in Australia not owned by BHP. Their small capacity and the lack of a steel-making operation meant that, in practice, Wundowie had little impact on BHP's monopoly in iron and steel.
The township of Wundowie and the remaining foundry operations there are the surviving legacy of the ironmaking operations. The administration building of the original plant is still used by the foundry and has a local government heritage listing. The extent of other remnants at the site of the old plant appears to be undocumented, but the distillation towers were still standing near the foundry in May 2010.
An annual event known as the Wundowie Iron Festival is named after the old plant.
Publications
1965 Wundowie : charcoal-iron, basic iron, hematite-iron : the wood-distillation, charcoal-iron and steel industry of WA, Paterson, Brokensha, 1965, retrieved 15 November 2019
1966 Cowie, W. McD (1966), Charcoal Iron & Steel Industry, Wundowie, W. McD. Cowie, retrieved 15 November 2019
1969 Charcoal Iron and Steel (Firm) (1969), Wundowie charcoal iron, the Industry, retrieved 15 November 2019

Yunnan Copper Company Limited (SZSE: 000878, formerly Yunnan Smelting Plant) is the third largest copper producer in China. It was established in 1958 in Kunming, Yunnan.
Its products include copper cathode, sulfuric acid, copper rod, bare copper wire, gold, silver, platinum, palladium, selenium, tellurium, bismuth, copper sulfate and nickel sulfate.
In November 2007, Aluminum Corporation of China Limited acquired 49% of total shares of Yunnan Copper Group, Yunnan Copper Company's parent company.
As of 2017, Yunnan Copper Die Casting, a joint venture between the company and Nanyang Explosion Protection Group Co., is a known electric motor manufacturer. They specialized in remanufacturing of electric motors by replacing aluminum rotors with copper rotors.
Electric motor manufacturing
In 2006, Yunnan Copper Co. Ltd. and Nanyang Explosion Protection Group Co. Ltd. established the joint venture Yunnan Copper Die Casting Co. Ltd. to commercialized copper rotor motors.
The International Copper Association, in collaboration with Yunnan Copper Die Casting, launched a program in 2013 to remanufacture old electric motors by replacing their aluminum rotors with cast copper rotors. This process significantly improves motor efficiency, allowing older models to meet modern energy efficiency standards.

The Zimbabwe School of Mines is an institution whose mandate is pivotal to the socio-economic development of Zimbabwe. From its inception in 1926 the school has produced competent mining practitioners who are in demand in the SADC region and internationally. The school is located in Killarney, Bulawayo. Zimbabwe School of mines mainly offers qualification in National Diploma and Higher National Diploma in Mining, Mine Geology, Mine Survey, Mining Mineral Processing & Extractive Metallurgy and Metallurgical Assaying. The curriculum constantly is revised and updated with help from mining companies in Zimbabwe and Southern Africa.
History
The Zimbabwe School of Mines was formed by a Presidential Charter in 1994 but had been in existence since 1926 operating from Gifford High School premises. The headmaster of Gifford High School Mr. P.H. Gifford with other like-minded gentlemen opened the Bulawayo Technical School in 1927 with 39 students. The School of Mines was then moved from Gifford High School to be under the Bulawayo Technical School in 1934. The establishment of a Mining Department at the Bulawayo Technical School was a result of the deliberations of a special committee appointed by the Minister of Mines. The committee was mandated ‘to consider the best means of affording technical education and practical training for youths who wished to enter the Mining Industry.’ The scheme also received approval from the then Rhodesia Chamber of Mines, which at that time was headquartered in Bulawayo. The Chamber of Mines ‘considered the move as a necessary provision of technical training for youths for one of the most important industries in the country’. Roland Starkey, who was the mining representative of the school in 1934, prepared a roadmap for starting “The School of Mines” which later became the fully-fledged Mining Department in 1936.
Quote from the Editorial of the Technical School Magazine of November 1934 about the Mining school: “The intention is to provide a measure of theoretical and practical training for boys and youths who intend to take mining as a career, or who are already engaged in the industry, in order that they shall better equip themselves for their life’s work. The beginning will be on modest scale, but the full scheme is flexible and has been so thought out that it will be possible later to build on the foundations thus provide a recognised School of Mines.”
Over the years the Bulawayo Technical School experienced growth and became a technical college in 1952, then a polytechnic in 1988.
In 1994 The Zimbabwe School of Mines moved to the current premises in Killarney after obtaining its own Presidential Charter to run as a separate entity.

Zinc smelting is the process of converting zinc concentrates (ores that contain zinc) into pure zinc. Zinc smelting has historically been more difficult than the smelting of other metals, e.g. iron, because in contrast, zinc has a low boiling point. At temperatures typically used for smelting metals, zinc is a gas that will escape from a furnace with the flue gas and be lost, unless specific measures are taken to prevent it.
The most common zinc concentrate processed is zinc sulfide, which is obtained by concentrating sphalerite via froth flotation. Secondary (recycled) zinc material, such as zinc oxide, is also processed with the zinc sulfide. Approximately 30% of all zinc produced is from recycled sources.
Methods
There are two methods of smelting zinc: the pyrometallurgical process and the electrolysis process. Both methods are still used. Both of these processes share the same first step: roasting.
Roasting
Roasting is a process of oxidizing zinc sulfide concentrates at high temperatures into an impure zinc oxide, called "Zinc Calcine". The chemical reactions that take place are as follows:
2
ZnS
+
3
O
2
⟶
2
ZnO
+
2
SO
2
{\displaystyle {\ce {2ZnS + 3O2 -> 2ZnO + 2SO2}}}
2
SO
2
+
O
2
⟶
2
SO
3
{\displaystyle {\ce {2SO2 + O2 -> 2SO3}}}
Approximately 90% of zinc in concentrates are oxidized to zinc oxide. However, at the roasting temperatures around 10% of the zinc reacts with the iron impurities of the zinc sulfide concentrates to form zinc ferrite. A byproduct of roasting is sulfur dioxide, which is further processed into sulfuric acid, a commodity. The linked refinery flow sheet shows a schematic of Noranda's eastern Canadian zinc roasting operation
The process of roasting varies based on the type of roaster used. There are three types of roasters: multiple-hearth, suspension, and fluidized-bed.
Multiple-hearth roaster
In a multiple-hearth roaster, the concentrate drops through a series of 9 or more hearths stacked inside a brick-lined cylindrical column. As the feed concentrate drops through the furnace, it is first dried by the hot gases passing through the hearths and then oxidized to produce calcine. The reactions are slow and can be sustained only by the addition of fuel. Multiple hearth roasters are unpressurized and operate at about 690 °C (1,270 °F). Operating time depends upon the composition of concentrate and the amount of the sulfur removal required. Multiple hearth roasters have the capability of producing a high-purity calcine.
Suspension roaster
In a suspension roaster, the concentrates are blown into a combustion chamber very similar to that of a pulverized coal furnace. The roaster consists of a refractory-lined cylindrical steel shell, with a large combustion space at the top and 2 to 4 hearths in the lower portion, similar to those of a multiple hearth furnace. Additional grinding, beyond that required for a multiple hearth furnace, is normally required to ensure that heat transfer to the material is sufficiently rapid for the desulfurization and oxidation reactions to occur in the furnace chamber. Suspension roasters are unpressurized and operate at about 980 °C (1,800 °F).
Fluidized-bed roaster
In a fluidized-bed roaster, finely ground sulfide concentrates are suspended and oxidized in feedstock bed supported on an air column. As in the suspension roaster, the reaction rates for desulfurization are more rapid than in the older multiple-hearth processes. Fluidized-bed roasters operate under a pressure slightly lower than atmospheric and at temperatures averaging 1,000 °C (1,830 °F). In the fluidized-bed process, no additional fuel is required after ignition has been achieved. The major advantages of this roaster are greater throughput capacities, greater sulfur removal capabilities, and lower maintenance.
Roast-Leach-Electrowin (RLE) process
Also known as the hydrometallurgical process, electrolysis process, or electrolytic process, RLE is more widely used than the pyrometallurgical processes.
The electrolysis process consists of 4 steps: leaching, purification, electrolysis, and melting and casting.
Leaching
The basic leaching chemical formula that drives this process is:
ZnO
+
SO
3
⟶
ZnSO
4
{\displaystyle {\ce {ZnO + SO3 -> ZnSO4}}}
This is achieved in practice through a process called double leaching. The calcine is first leached in a neutral or slightly acidic solution (of sulfuric acid) in order to leach the zinc out of the zinc oxide. The remaining calcine is then leached in strong sulfuric acid to leach the rest of the zinc out of the zinc oxide and zinc ferrite. The result of this process is a solid and a liquid; the liquid contains the zinc and is often called leach product; the solid is called leach residue and contains precious metals (usually lead and silver) which are sold as a by-product. There is also iron in the leach product from the strong acid leach, which is removed in an intermediate step, in the form of goethite, jarosite, and haematite. There is still cadmium, copper, arsenic, antimony, cobalt, germanium, nickel, and thallium in the leach product. Therefore, it needs to be purified.
Purification
The purification process utilizes the cementation process to further purify the zinc. It uses zinc dust and steam to remove copper, cadmium, cobalt, and nickel, which would interfere with the electrolysis process. After purification, concentrations of these impurities are limited to less than 0.05 milligram per liter (4×10−7 pound per U.S. gallon). Purification is usually conducted in large agitated tanks. The process takes place at temperatures ranging from 40 to 85 °C (104 to 185 °F), and pressures ranging from atmospheric to 2.4 atm (240 kPa) (absolute scale). The by-products are sold for further refining.
The zinc sulfate solution must be very pure for electrowinning to be at all efficient. Impurities can change the decomposition voltage enough to where the electrolysis cell produces largely hydrogen gas rather than zinc metal.
Electrolysis
Zinc is extracted from the purified zinc sulfate solution by electrowinning, which is a specialized form of electrolysis. The process works by passing an electric current through the solution in a series of cells. This causes the zinc to deposit on the cathodes (aluminium sheets) and oxygen to form at the anodes. Sulfuric acid is also formed in the process and reused in the leaching process. Every 24 to 48 hours, each cell is shut down, the zinc-coated cathodes are removed and rinsed, and the zinc is mechanically stripped from the aluminium plates.
Electrolytic zinc smelters contain as many as several hundred cells. A portion of the electrical energy is converted into heat, which increases the temperature of the electrolyte. Electrolytic cells operate at temperature ranges from 30 to 35 °C (86 to 95 °F) and at atmospheric pressure. A portion of the electrolyte is continuously circulated through the cooling towers both to cool and concentrate the electrolyte through evaporation of water. The cooled and concentrated electrolyte is then recycled to the cells. This process accounts for approximately one-third of all the energy usage when smelting zinc.
There are two common processes for electrowinning the metal: the low current density process, and the Tainton high current density process. The former uses a 10% sulfuric acid solution as the electrolyte, with current density of 270–325 amperes per square meter. The latter uses 22–28% sulfuric acid solution as the electrolyte with a current density of about 1,000 amperes per square metre. The latter gives better purity and has higher production capacity per volume of electrolyte, but has the disadvantage of running hotter and being more corrosive to the vessel in which it is done. In either of the electrolytic processes, each metric ton of zinc production expends about 3,900 kW⋅h (14 GJ) of electric power.
Melting and casting
Depending on the type of end-products produced, the zinc cathodes coming out of the electro-winning plant can undergo an additional transformation step in a foundry. Zinc cathodes are melted in induction furnaces and cast into marketable products such as ingots. Other metals and alloy components may be added to produce zinc containing alloys used in die-casting or general galvanization applications. Finally, molten zinc may be transported to nearby conversion plants or third parties using specially designed insulated containers.
Pyrometallurgical processes
There are also several pyrometallurgical processes that reduce zinc oxide using carbon, then distil the metallic zinc from the resulting mix in an atmosphere of carbon monoxide. The major downfall of any of the pyrometallurgical process is that it is only 98% pure; a standard composition is 1.3% lead, 0.2% cadmium, 0.03% iron, and 98.5% zinc. This may be pure enough for galvanization, but not enough for die casting alloys, which requires special high-grade zinc (99.995% pure). In order to reach this purity the zinc must be refined.
The four types of commercial pyrometallurgical processes are the St. Joseph Minerals Corporation's (electrothermic) process, the blast furnace process, the New Jersey Zinc continuous vertical-retort process, and the Belgian-type horizontal retort process.
St. Joseph Mineral Company (electrothermic) process
This process was developed by the St. Joseph Mineral Company in 1930, and is the only pyrometallurgical process still used in the US to smelt zinc. The advantage of this system is that it is able to smelt a wide variety of zinc-bearing materials, including electric arc furnace dust. The disadvantage of this process is that it is less efficient than the electrolysis process.
The process begins with a downdraft sintering operation. The sinter, which is a mixture of roaster calcine and EAF (electric arc furnace) calcine, is loaded onto a gate type conveyor and then combustions gases are pumped through the sinter. The carbon in the combustion gases react with some impurities, such as lead, cadmium, and halides. These impurities are driven off into filtration bags. The sinter after this process, called product sinter, usually has a composition of 48% zinc, 8% iron, 5% aluminium, 4% silicon, 2.5% calcium, and smaller quantities of magnesium, lead, and other metals. The sinter product is then charged with coke into an electric retort furnace. A pair of graphite electrodes from the top and bottom of the furnace produce current flow through the mixture. The coke provides electrical resistance to the mixture in order to heat the mixture to 1,400 °C (2,550 °F) and produce carbon monoxide. These conditions allow for the following chemical reaction to occur:
ZnO
+
CO
⟶
Zn
↑
+
CO
2
{\displaystyle {\ce {ZnO + CO -> Zn (^) + CO2}}}
The zinc vapour and carbon dioxide pass to a vacuum condenser, where zinc is recovered by bubbling through a molten zinc bath. Over 95% of the zinc vapour leaving the retort is condensed to liquid zinc. The carbon dioxide is regenerated with carbon, and the carbon monoxide is recycled back to the retort furnace.
Blast furnace process (Imperial Smelting Process)
This process was developed by the National Smelting Company at Avonmouth Docks, England, in order to increase production, increase efficiency, and decrease labour and maintenance costs. L. J. Derham proposed using a spray of molten lead droplets to rapidly cool and absorb the zinc vapour, despite the high concentration of carbon dioxide. The mixture is then cooled, where the zinc separates from the lead. The first plant using this design opened up in 1950. One of the advantages of this process is that it can co-produce lead bullion and copper dross. In 1990, it accounted for 12% of the world's zinc production.
The process starts by charging solid sinter and heated coke into the top of the blast furnace. Preheated air at 190 to 1,050 °C (370 to 1,920 °F) is blown into the bottom of the furnace. Zinc vapour and sulfides leave through the top and enter the condenser. Slag and lead collect at the bottom of the furnace and are tapped off regularly. The zinc is scrubbed from the vapour in the condenser via liquid lead. The liquid zinc is separated from the lead in the cooling circuit. Approximately 5,000 metric tons (5,500 short tons) of lead are required each year for this process, however this process recovers 25% more lead from the starting ores than other processes.
New Jersey Zinc continuous vertical retort
The New Jersey Zinc process is no longer used to produce primary zinc in the U.S., in Europe and Japan, but it still is used to treat secondary operations. This process peaked in 1960, when it accounted for 5% of world zinc production. A modified version of this process is still used at a Huludao plant in China (originally established by the Japanese in 1937), which produced 65,000 metric tons per year as of 1991 and increased capacity to at least 210,000 t/year by 2023.
This process begins by roasting concentrates that are mixed with coal and briquetted in two stages. The briquettes are then heated in an autogenous coker at 700 °C (1,292 °F) and then charged into the retort. There are three reasons to briquette the calcine: to ensure free downward movement of the charge; to permit heat transfer across a practical size cross-section; to allow adequate porosity for the passage of reduced zinc vapour to the top of the retort. The reduced zinc vapour that is collected at the top of the retort is then condensed to a liquid.
Overpelt improved upon this design by using only one large condensation chamber, instead of many small ones, as it was originally designed. This allowed for the carbon monoxide to be recirculated into the furnaces for heating the retorts.
This process was licensed to the Imperial Smelting Corporation (ISC), based in Avonmouth, England, which had a large vertical retort (VR) plant in production for many years. It was used until the mid-1970s when it was superseded by the company's Imperial Smelting Furnace (ISF) plant. The VR plant was demolished in 1975.
Belgian-type horizontal retort process
This process was the main process used in Britain from the mid-19th century until 1951. The process was very inefficient as it was designed as a small scale batch operation. Each retort only produced 40 kilograms (88 lb) so companies would put them together in banks and used one large gas burner to heat all of them. The Belgian process requires redistillation to remove impurities of lead, cadmium, iron, copper, and arsenic.
History
The first production of zinc in quantity seems to have been in India starting from 12th century and later in China from 16th century. In India, zinc was produced at Zawar from the 12th to the 18th centuries, although some zinc artifacts appear to have been made during classical antiquity in Europe. The sphalerite ore found here was presumably converted to zinc oxide via roasting, although no archaeological evidence of this has been found. Smelting is thought to have been done in sealed cylindrical clay retorts which were packed with a mixture of roasted ore, dolomite, and an organic material, perhaps cow dung, and then placed vertically in a furnace and heated to around 1100 °C. Carbon monoxide produced by the charring of the organic material would have reduced the zinc oxide to zinc vapour, which then liquefied in a conical clay condenser at the bottom of the retort, dripping down into a collection vessel. Over the period 1400–1800, production is estimated to have been about 200 kg/day. Zinc was also smelted in China from the mid-sixteenth century on.
Large-scale zinc production in Europe began with William Champion, who patented a zinc distillation process in 1738. In Champion's process, zinc ore (in this case, the carbonate, ZnCO3) was sealed in large reduction pots with charcoal and heated in a furnace. The zinc vapor then descended through an iron condensing pipe until reaching a water-filled vessel at the bottom. Champion set up his first zinc works in Bristol, England, but soon expanded to Warmley and by 1754 had built four zinc furnaces there. Although Champion succeeded in producing about 200 tons of zinc, his business plans were not successful and he was bankrupt by 1769. However, zinc smelting continued in this area until 1880.
Early European zinc production also took place in Silesia, in Carinthia, and in Liège, Belgium. In the Carinthian process, used in works established in 1798 by Bergrath Dillinger, a wood-fueled furnace heated a large number of small vertical retorts, and zinc vapor then dropped through a ceramic pipe into a common condensation chamber below. This process was out of use by 1840. The Belgian and Silesian processes both used horizontal retorts. In Silesia, Johann Ruhberg built a furnace to distill zinc in 1799, at first using pots but later changing to flat-bottomed retorts called "muffles", attached to horizontal tubes bent downwards in which the zinc condensed. The Silesian process eventually merged with the Belgian process. This process, developed by Jean-Jacques Daniel Dony, was introduced 1805–1810, and used retorts with a cylindrical cross-section. Condensers were horizontal clay tubes extending from the ends of the retorts. The merged "Belgo-Silesian" horizontal retort process was widely adopted in Europe by the third quarter of the 19th century, and later in the United States.
Experimental attempts to extract zinc via electrolysis begun in the 19th century, but the only commercially successful process before 1913 was through electrolysis of an aqueous zinc chloride solution, a process used in Great Britain and Austria. The Anaconda Copper Company, at Anaconda, Montana, and the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company, at Trail, British Columbia, both built successful electrolytic plants in 1915 using the currently used zinc sulfate process. This method has continued to grow in importance and in 1975 accounted for 68% of world zinc production.
The continuous vertical retort process was introduced in 1929 by the New Jersey Zinc Company. This process used a retort with silicon carbide walls, around 9 meters high and with a cross section of 2 by 0.3 meters. The walls of the retort were heated to 1300 °C and briquettes consisting of sintered zinc ore, coke, coal, and recycled material were fed into the top of the retort. Gaseous zinc was drawn off from the top of the column and, after a 20-hour journey through the retort, spent briquettes were removed from the bottom. To condense the gaseous zinc, the company first used a simple brick chamber with carborundum baffles, but efficiency was poor. During the 1940s a condenser was developed which condensed the zinc vapor on a spray of liquid zinc droplets, thrown up by an electrical impeller.
The electrothermic process, developed by the St. Joseph's Lead Company, was somewhat similar. The first commercial plant using this process was built in 1930 at the present site of Josephtown, Pennsylvania. The electrothermic furnace was a steel cylinder around 15 meters high and 2 meters in diameter, lined with firebrick. A mixture of sintered ore and coke was fed into the top of the furnace, and a current of 10,000–20,000 amperes, at a potential difference of 240 volts, was applied between carbon electrodes in the furnace, raising the temperature to 1200–1400 °C. An efficient condenser was devised for this process from 1931–1936; it consisted of a bath of liquid zinc which the exhaust gases were drawn through by suction. The zinc content of the gas stream was absorbed into the liquid bath.
The blast-furnace process was developed starting in 1943 at Avonmouth, England by the Imperial Smelting Corporation, which became part of Rio Tinto Zinc in 1968. It uses a spray of molten lead droplets to condense the zinc vapor.

An ébéniste (pronounced [ebenist]) is a cabinet-maker, particularly one who works in ebony. The term is a loanword from French and translates to "ebonist".
Etymology and ambiguities
As opposed to ébéniste, the term menuisier denotes a woodcarver or chairmaker in French. The English equivalent for ébéniste, "ebonist", is not commonly used. Originally, an ébéniste was one who worked with ebony, a favoured luxury wood for mid-17th century Parisian cabinets, originating in imitation of elite furniture being made in Antwerp. The word is 17th-century in origin. Early Parisian ébénistes often came from the Low Countries themselves; an outstanding example is Pierre Gole, who worked at the Gobelins manufactory making cabinets and table tops veneered with marquetry, the traditional enrichment of ébénisterie, or "cabinet-work".
History
Ébénistes make case furniture, either veneered or painted. Under Parisian guild regulations, painted varnishes, generically called vernis Martin, were applied in separate workshops, sawdust being an enemy to freshly varnished surfaces. During the French Revolution the guilds in Paris and elsewhere were abolished (1791), and with them went all their regulations. As one result of this, Parisian chairmakers were able to produce veneered chairs, just as London furniture-makers, less stringently ruled, had been able to make since the production of the first chairs with splats shortly before 1720, in imitation of Chinese chairs.
Because of this amalgamation of trades, makers of chairs and of other seat furniture began to use veneering techniques, formerly the guarded privilege of ébénistes. This privilege became less distinct after the relaxation of guild rules of the Ancien Régime, and after the French Revolution's abolition of guilds in 1791. Seat furniture in the Empire style was often veneered with mahogany, and later in pale woods also.
From the mid-19th century onward, the two French trades, ébéniste and menuisier, often combined under the single roof of a "furnisher", and the craft began to make way for the industry. In Germany in Frommern a line of high polished production take up the ideas of the royal Hofebenist
From the mid-17th century through the 18th century, a notable number of ébénistes of German and Low Countries extraction were pre-eminent among Parisian furniture-makers, as the abbreviated list below suggests.
Some 17th- and 18th-century Parisian ébénistes
Later French ébénistes
Henry Dasson
François Linke
Louis Majorelle
Émile-Jacques Ruhlmann
German Ebenists, or Kunstschreiner
Rudolf Gambs, St. Petersburg, Karlsruhe
Wilhelm Kimbel
Klinckerfuß Johannes (1770–1831) 1790 Württemberg
Friedrich Wirth (Entrepreneur) (1806–1883) 1857 Württemberg
Wilhelm Wirth (Entrepreneur) (1837–1917) Württemberg
Ébénistes outside France
Gabriele Capello (Turin)
Christopher Fuhrlohg (London)
Mathäus Funk (Bern)
Gerrit Jensen (London)
Georg Haupt (Stockholm)
Pierre Langlois (London)
Charles-Honoré Lannuier (New York)
Abdelkader Saaidi (Casablanca)
Pietro Piffetti (Turin)
Abraham Roentgen (Neuwied)
David Roentgen (Neuwied)
Decon Brodie (Edinburgh)
Thomas Elfe (Born in London, established in Charleston)